=head1 The Twelve Days of Dancer, 2023 Edition

Well, we made it another year! 2023 is about to ride off into the sunset,
and 2024 is just around the corner. It's been a while since we've done
one of these, and the Dancer Core Team thought that with the exciting
year we've had, how better to wrap up the year with pretty paper and a
bow than to celebrate with the 2023 installment of the Twelve Days of
Dancer!

=head2 State of the Dancer

This has been an exciting year for Dancer2, and another lap around the
sun for Dancer(1).

=head3 Dancer2 1.0.0

The big news of 2023 is the release of Dancer2 1.0.0. This is perhaps the
most exciting release of Dancer2 since it first found its way into the
Perl community; possibly ever! The significance of this release is
almost more for what it means, and less for what it contains. With this
release, we're very publicly planting the flag that Dancer2 is stable
and ready for the big time. But anyone who's used Dancer2 in the last 6
or 7 years already knew that, didn't you? :-)

So, why now? What happened? Let's take a peek behind the curtain and see
how this all happened.

It was a warm and sunny July day in Toronto, and three of the Core Team
members (Sawyer, Yanick, and Jason)just happened to be within
bear-hug-and-noogie distance of each other for the first time since...
well, frankly, we don't remember either! The decision was made to hold a
table hostage down the hall from the registration table, where we could
plot the future of Dancer2's world domination. GeekRuthie, a long time
cheerleader and vocal supporter of Dancer, also happened to be at the
conference, and was also invited to help shape what the future world of
Dancer2 dominance would look like. We cogitated and brainstormed and
schemed and marshalled our resources, and laid out what the next release
of Dancer2 should look like, lined up our troops, and sprang into action.

(about 30% of this is true; there was a conference, the above-named
people were at it, and Dancer2 1.0.0 eventually was released, but the
rest, dear reader, is for you to decide how true it is, or if it really
matters for purposes of this story/release!)

We had long labored under a versioning scheme that closely resembled
but wasn't exactly like semantic versioning. As we hammered out details
of the next release, the question arose of what version number to use.
Should it be 0.500000? 0.450000? 123456? The more we talked, the
further away that answer became. It was then Yanick came up with the
most amazing idea: the next version should be 1.0.0. Dancer2 had been
stable for years at that point, we were spending too much time on
determining a version number, when really we could just jump to
1.0.0, go with a simpler versioning scheme that everyone understood
(including us!), and giving us a few extra clock cycles to spend on
more important things (like dinner). We ironed out a few more details,
and once the conference wrapped up, the hard work began. It took
longer than we had originally anticipated, but finally, Dancer2
1.0.0 was unleashed upon an unsuspecting world.

An added bonus was that this meeting in Toronto directly led to the
addition/assimilation of GeekRuthie to the Dancer Core Team. We're
excited to have her as part of the team; Ruth's software development
and social skills, plus her great ideas, are a wonderful addition
to our group.

The community feedback on this has been amazing, and exceeded our
wildest expectations. Thank you so much for your support and glowing
reception of this release!

=head3 Dancer(1)

David Precious (bigpresh) is maintaining Dancer(1); fortunately for him,
it's in a state where it doesn't require much attention from the Core
Team anymore, and he's been able to think more about Dancer2 these days.

We still have no immediate plans to discontinue support or retire
Dancer(1), but aside from security patches and bug fixes, the Core Team
is no longer devoting active clock cycles to further its development.

As there are changes in the long-term status of Dancer(1), we will make
every effort to keep the community informed.

=head2 Questions for the Community

On behalf of all of us on the Core Team, I pose a few questions to our
community:

=over

=item * Porting of Dancer(1) Plugins

There's a L<wishlist on the Dancer2 wiki|https://github.com/PerlDancer/Dancer2/wiki/Wishlist>
of modules we'd like to see ported from Dancer that haven't made the jump
yet. Are you interested in tackling any of these? Let us know and we'll
offer whatever assistance and moral support that we can!

If there's more you'd like to see ported, we encourage you to add to the
wiki.

=item * GitHub Discussions

With the launch of Dancer2 1.0.0, we also enabled GitHub Discussions for
Dancer2. Do you find this to be valuable? Would you prefer to stick to IRC
and the mailing list? Are there other avenues of communication you'd like
us to pursue (Slack, Discord, etc.)?

=item * Future Direction

Is there something you'd like to see in Dancer2 that we haven't addressed?
We'd love to hear about it! Open an issue on GitHub, post to our mailing
list, or start a discussion on GitHub. Our goal is to best serve the needs
of our community, and we rely on your feedback and ideas to make that
happen.

=back

=head2 Let's Dance!

Grab that framework and bust a move on the dancefloor! Enjoy our carefully
curated selection of articles, and grow your Dancer toolbox just a bit
more. We hope these inspire you to further engage and participate in
this wonderful community.

=head2 Author

This article has been written by Jason Crome (CromeDome) for the Twelve Days
of Dancer.

=head2 Copyright

No copyright retained. Enjoy.

Jason A. Crome / CromeDome
