=head1 Building a Sleek Blog in a Snap with Dancer2 and LiteBlog

=head2 A Word of Introduction

Perl has a curious way of never truly releasing its grip on a programmer.
Recently, I felt the need to revamp my website, but the idea of spawning another
Wordpress docker image on my server felt really overkill for what I had in mind.
I wanted to do something super simple, with a landing page, a bit of info about
my social profiles and, maybe, some articles if I wish to write content here and
there. 

It had been a decade since I last delved into Perl code, but then I saw the
release of Dancer2 1.0.0, announced by Jason. That was all I needed to
truly awaken from my hibernation.

So I decided to revisit my first programming love and see how rusty my Perl
skills were.

As it turns out, not only did I really enjoy building my website from the ground
up using Dancer2, but it also became clear that I had curated enough material to
craft a reusable plugin. 

And here was LiteBlog, a plugin able to change a Dancer2 app into a sleek,
responsive, and file-based blogging engine.

The 2023 edition of this Dancer Advent Calendar is the perfect chance for me
to share a bit about Liteblog, explain its features, and perhaps convince you to 
update your own personal site with it (why not!).

=head2 The Concept Behind LiteBlog

Minimalism stands at the core of LiteBlog. The aim was to design something
uncluttered and lightweight — true to the spirit of Dancer itself.

The system is designed to work without traditional databases. Instead, everything from
articles to configurations is manageable via static files in YAML or Markdown
formats.

As I aimed for a modern and responsive design that follows the latest
HTML/CSS best practices, I decided to use Chat-GPT as my virtual web designer.
As you may know, it excels in this area, especially when given detailed prompts
for each design element.  Iterating with it step by step, I managed to get great
HTML/CSS content that matched exactly what I had in mind for the expected
render.

Currently,
L<Dancer2::Plugin::LiteBlog|https://metacpan.org/dist/Dancer2-Plugin-LiteBlog>
has reached version 0.05. It is stable and ready to serve as the backbone for
your blog or personal site should you decide to give it a try.

In this article, I'll detail its standout features, show how to bootstrap
a Liteblog site, and guide you through the content creation process.

If you want to see LiteBlog in action right away, you can head over to my site:
L<https://alexissukrieh.com>.

=cut


=head2 Scaffolding a Dancer2 app into a Liteblog site

In a nutshell, Liteblog is crafted for those who appreciate minimalism.
Editing YAML and Markdown file is the only thing you need to craft content and 
fine-tune your Liteblog site.
There is no database involved, on-purpose.

Before LiteBlog can work its magic, you need a Dancer2 app. Generate it:

  $ dancer2 gen -a my_app

Then, run the LiteBlog scaffolder from within the application directory:

  $ cd my_app
  $ liteblog-scaffold .

This command populates your app directory with LiteBlog's assets, such as CSS
files, views, and even starter content.

To hook it all up, modify the main app module to enable the LiteBlog plugin:

  package My::App;
  use Dancer2;
  use Dancer2::Plugin::LiteBlog;

  liteblog_init;

  1;

Now, your Dancer2 app is a Liteblog. A default '/' route is defined, and widgets
(that can be defined in your liteblog's settings) can also define their own
routes.
The blog engine is actually a Liteblog Widget. But let's just see what happens
right there, when Liteblog is invoked from a pure Dancer2 app.

Just launch your app and open its URL with your browser.
You'll be greeted with a splash screen:

  $ plackup bin/app.psgi

Follow the on-screen instructions to enable features and widgets by adding the
provided config snippet to your 'config.yml', then restart.

Now, you have C<Activities> cards enabled on the home and a nice article that you
can read thanks to the C<Blog> widget. 

=head2 Publishing content

LiteBlog makes content creation intuitive. Articles reside in a specified root
directory as markdown files with coresponding 'meta.yml' for metadata. To
publish, go in your C<articles/> folder (it has been created by the scaffolder),
and then follow theses steps:

Create a directory for the category of your post (if not, the article will be
considered a page). Note that the directory name is the post slug.

Inside, you first need to create the metadata file: C<meta.yml>. It is mandatory
and should at least contain a title. Here is an example of a valid metadata file
for an article:

    ---
    title: "Some Great LiteBlog Article"
    image: "featured.jpg"
    tags:
      - "perl"
      - "dancer"

Finally, you can now create the C<content.md> file, which, as its name suggests,
should be written in Markdown format and will be used as the actual content of
the article.

The easiest way to get started is to edit the scaffolded article provided
once you bootstrap your Liteblog app.

=head2 Main features of a Liteblog site

As of version 0.05, LiteBlog's toolbox includes:

=over 4

=item B<Activities cards>: Display your profiles and activities in an elegant grid.

=item B<Blog engine>: Effortlessly manage and publish articles.

=item B<Caching system>: Speed up page rendering without breaking a sweat.

=item B<Responsive design>: Your blog will look great on any device.

=item B<Highlight.js support>: Syntax highlighting for articles featuring code.

=back

=head2 Deploying as a Docker image

It's quite classic these days to go with a Docker image for deployment. 
In case you want to build a Docker image for your Liteblog site, I have
everything you need.

Here is a Dockerfile to build your LiteBlog image:

    # Use a recent Debian release as base
    FROM debian:buster-slim

    # Install required packages
    RUN apt-get update && \
        apt-get install -y perl cpanminus libdbi-perl build-essential libssl-dev libexpat1-dev && \
        apt-get clean && \
        rm -rf /var/lib/apt/lists/*

    # Install Dancer2, Starman, and other necessary CPAN modules
    RUN cpanm -n Dancer2 Starman

    # Install LiteBlog and its dependencies
    RUN set -e; \
        cpanm --installdeps -n Dancer2::Plugin::LiteBlog || (cat /root/.cpanm/work/*/build.log && false)

    RUN set -e; \
        cpanm Dancer2::Plugin::LiteBlog || (cat /root/.cpanm/work/*/build.log && false)

    # Set the environment for Dancer2
    ENV DANCER_ENVIRONMENT production

    # Copy your Dancer2 application to the container
    COPY . /app

    # Set working directory
    WORKDIR /app

    # Expose the port Starman will run on
    EXPOSE 5000

    # Start the Dancer2 application with Starman
    CMD ["starman", "--workers=2", "bin/app.psgi", "-p", "5000"]

=head2 More info & Contributing

To see LiteBlog in action, visit: L<https://alexissukrieh.com>

You can also read about 
L<the story behind Liteblog|https://alexissukrieh.com/dev/liteblog-a-minimalist-file-based-blog-engine-for-perl/> on my site.

To contribute or report issues, head over to GitHub: L<https://github.com/sukria/Dancer2-Plugin-LiteBlog>

And don't forget to show your support on CPAN: L<https://metacpan.org/dist/Dancer2-Plugin-LiteBlog>

=head2 Author

This article was written by Alexis Sukrieh for the Dancer Advent Calendar 2023.

=cut

