=head1 Tidings of Comfort and Joy: Dancer Core Team, TPRF Partnership

In the lead up to Dancer2 1.0.0, the Dancer Core Team finalized an exciting
collaboration with The Perl and Raku Foundation (TPRF) to have the
foundation collect and manage funds on behalf of the Dancer project.

=head2 Background

Running an open-source project like Dancer2 is no small feat. Our team,
though passionate and dedicated, is still fairly small. Dealing with the
administrative side of things (managing funds, paying bills, etc.) is not
our strong suit. And every inefficient minute we spend on it, we're not
spending on advancing Dancer and addressing community needs.

Enter TPRF: a foundation with the resources and infrastructure to support
Perl and Raku projects by handling the administration and monetary aspects,
leaving us free to focus on what we do best - coding and enhancing Dancer.

We're thrilled to pilot this partnership, which could serve as a model for
other Perl and Raku projects in the future.

=head2 Why This Matters

TPRF's involvement is a game-changer. They don't just help us with the
paperwork; they open doors to easily receive new funding and allow us
to secure the resources we need to fund the ongoing development of Dancer
and its ecosystem.

=head2 Donations - the gift that keeps on giving

All future donations will go into a fund that's managed by TPRF, and
existing Dancer funds will be transfered to this fund. In doing this,
TPRF can extend its 501c status to Dancer donations, meaning that
B<any donations made to the Dancer project are fully tax deductible!>
So not only will your donations advance the development of Dancer, but
you can use these donations to reduce your own tax burden. Everyone wins!

Funds collected by TPRF on behalf of the Dancer project go 100% towards
Dancer and the Dancer Core Team to be spent on the further development
of Dancer and Dancer-related projects.

=head2 Details, details

In the spirit of community, the Dancer Core Team agreed to:

=over

=item * Follow a Code of Conduct

We believe in the spirit of a clear, inclusive Code of Conduct to create
a safe space for the community. Our existing
L<Code of Conduct|https://metacpan.org/dist/Dancer2/view/lib/Dancer2/Policy.pod>
serves us in this purpose and we hope more communities will adopt a
similar policy.

=item * Responsible spending of funds

We chose a process that works for our team's system of governance on how
funds can be spent. TL;DR: I can't unilaterally take that vacation to
Tahiti that I've always wanted (at least not on team funds!).

=back

In addition to the agreed adherence rules set by TPRF, we intend to openly
and transparently share with the community how funding will be spent.

=head2 Donating

If you're looking to donate to the Dancer project, you can reach out to
L<The Perl & Raku Foundation|https://www.perlfoundation.org/donate.html>
to donate and make it clear the donation should go to the Dancer project.

Thank you for helping us maintain and develop Dancer. Please reach out
to inform us of your interest in Dancer and if you have any interests in
particular aspects of Dancer you want to see improved or supported.

=head2 Acknowledgements

We'd really like to extend our thanks to TPRF for their willingness to
work with us on piloting this program. We hope the community is as
excited for this as we are!

=head2 Author

This article has been written by Jason Crome for the Twelve Days of Dancer.

=head2 Copyright

No copyright retained. Enjoy.

Jason A. Crome / CromeDome

