=head1 Medium-Scale Dancer, Part 3: Views

The
L<first|http://advent.perldancer.org/2015/3> two
L<parts|http://advent.perldancer.org/2015/4> of this article series
broke the monolithic C<lib/App.pm> file up into a series of Perl
modules, each focused on a functional centroid of the application.

If we describe the default C<lib/App.pm> file as monolithic, then we
might get away with describing the view files as polylithic, because we
do not need to break the view files up; they naturally map to web pages,
so the app's URL scheme effectively keeps them separated by purpose.

Although we will not start this part of the series needing to break up
an overly large file, I can pass along some tips that might cause you to
rethink the current structure of your app's C<views/*> tree.

=head2 The View Naming Scheme Should Match the URL Scheme

Older web frameworks like PHP, ASP, and JSP define the web app's URL
structure in the file system. The route scheme defined in the previous
part of this article series would look like this in PHP:

 index.php
 mf/index.php
 mf/subfeature/index.php

The view code — HTML and inline JavaScript — is intermixed with the
server-side code in the same file. Worse, single files like
C<mf/subfeature/index.php> have to handle multiple HTTP verbs; in our
example, C<GET>, C<POST>, C<PUT>, and C<DELETE>. If each verb returns a
different web page, you end up with a huge top-level C<if/elseif/else>
block dividing the file up into a bunch of logically separate chunks.
There are other bad consequences to this web framework design choice,
such as that if you want your text editor to do syntax coloring
correctly, it needs to be able to switch among PHP, JavaScript, and HTML
syntax, all within the same file. The programmer ends up needing to do
the same sort of context switching, too.

Simply put, this is a mess.

L<Template::Toolkit|http://www.template-toolkit.org/> — Dancer's default
template system — solves part of this problem by separating the view
files from the server-side Perl code. Modern web app development
frameworks like L<Angular|https://angularjs.org/> solve the rest of it
by encouraging you to move all of your JavaScript code into separate
C<*.js> files, rather than put it inline in the HTML file.

There is nothing about the way Dancer works that enforces or even
encourages any particular C<views/*> file naming scheme. Thus this tip:
for your own sanity, I recommend that you name your view files after the
corresponding route. The Dancer scheme corresponding to the above PHP
scheme might look something like this:

 views/top.tt
 views/mf/top.tt
 views/mf/subfeature/get.tt
 views/mf/subfeature/post.tt
 views/mf/subfeature/put.tt
 views/mf/subfeature/delete.tt

This maps Dancer routes 1:1 to view files, using a naming scheme that is
easy to remember, since it's nearly identical to the URL scheme. It's so
simple a mapping that you could write a Perl one-liner to do the
transform. By restricting yourself to a simple naming convention, you
have removed a whole class of details that you have to keep in mind
while working on your web app; you don't have to guess where the view
file for a given route handler lives, you already I<know> where it
lives. You will quickly rediscover this simple mapping years from now
when you have to work on the web app again.

This naming scheme is very much a suggestion, rather than a
prescription. For one thing, you may find that the C<DELETE
/mf/subfeature> route needs no view, because it just deletes one
database record and then redirects you to C<GET /mf/subfeature> to show
the change in the normal view. In that case, you would not need
C<views/mf/subfeature/delete.tt>.

The important thing is to I<have> a well-thought-out naming scheme, not
necessarily to follow the one I've laid out above.

=head2 Factor Common UI Elements Out

If you reuse a particular UI element across different parts of your web
app, put its view file into a special view directory. I use
C<views/parts> for this.

If you have an HTML fragment page that is incorporated into your web app
dynamically on the client side via Ajax, you will need a corresponding
Dancer route for it, and probably a Perl module for it, too:

 views/parts/component.tt
 lib/App/Parts/Component.pm

Then in C<lib/App/Parts/Component.pm>:

 sub _get {
     # ...work out how to build the component
 
     return template '/parts/component' => {
         stuff => 'goes here'
     };
 }
 
 prefix '/parts' => sub {
     get 'component' => \&_get;
 };

I chose the naming scheme for the function carefully. I want to be able
to use short names here that correspond to the HTTP verb that the
function handles without colliding with the short names exported by
Dancer's DSL. The L<standard Perl style rules|http://perldoc.perl.org/perlstyle.html>
say that a leading underscore marks a function that isn't meant to be
called from outside the module, which is exactly correct here; only the
route handler defined below that function should be calling it.

You may prefer a different scheme, such as C<Get()>, even though this is
unconventional Perl style. Again, the important thing is to I<have> a
consistent style, not that you use the style I've chosen here.

One argument in favor of C<Get()> over C<_get()> is that you might need
to be able to reuse this route handler in another of your Perl modules,
bodily incorporating the HTML fragment within another web page on the
server side, thus saving an Ajax round trip the first time that that web
page is served.

For example, C<lib/App/MajorFeature.pm> might have something like this
in it:

 sub Get {
     # Work out how to build the main part of the top-level /mf page
     ...Perl code here...
 
     # Assemble the pieces
     return template '/mf/top' => {
         component   => App::Parts::Component::Get(),
         other_stuff => 'goes here',
     };
 }
 
 prefix '/mf' => sub {
     get '/' => \&Get;
     # other route handlers here
 };

Then within C<views/mf/top.tt>, you can reference C<$component> to
bodily include that component's HTML fragment into the larger page.

Now that we have sorted out the purely server-side HTML and Perl code
files, we will look at the Dancer app design decisions that affect its
presentation to the browser in the
L<next part of this article series|http://advent.perldancer.org/2015/6>.
