=head1 Spam and bot prevention without the use of CAPTCHAs

=head2 The problem

I was writing a contact form for my LLC, and having been the victim of an automated form-filler in the
past, I wanted to prevent getting spammed by my own contact form. My first instinct told me to add a CAPTCHA
to the form as a means to ensure there's a human at the keyboard. But as it turns out, this isn't a great 
solution for a variety of reasons.

=head2 A little background

I worked with my friend Job a few contracts back, and he is passionate about developing accessible software and
educating other developers about accessibility issues. Job really opened my eyes to a lot of bad development 
practices, and the problems they caused for users with accessibility needs. So when he heard I wanted to
put a CAPTCHA on my form, he nearly had a stroke. When the initial shock wore off, we talked about how I could
accomplish my goal, but do it in an accessible way.

CAPTCHAs come in a number of shapes and sizes. At the time I wrote this, reCAPTCHA was the latest hotness. 
It featured text that was really hard to read, and on occasion, featured audio for those who couldn't see or 
read the text. They were also unfortunately stupidly easy to crack, and thanks to Mechanical Turk and other
tricks, they quickly became a useless piece of nuisance for your average web user.

Why are CAPTCHAs bad for accessibility? I don't know about you, but even with good vision, I have a really 
hard time reading the text on many CAPTCHAs. I cannot begin to imagine how much more difficult it would be 
for a sighted user to attempt to read one. But many have audio, you say! Have you listened to a CAPTCHA
that's read to you? I am slightly hard of hearing, and I am unable to make them out many times. And some
clever developers have even found ways to circumvent the audio CAPTCHAs now. With more modern CAPTCHAs, users
with screen readers and other assistive devices/settings can often exhibit some of the same signs that bots
do, but unfortunately, you're not allowed to declare or prove your humanity - it's all up to a machine
learning algorithm, and once you're marked a bot, things are out of your control.

Even before I learned about the accessibility issues with CAPTCHAs, I knew adding one to my form was just
bad UX. It's shifting the burden of your problem onto your users. But when the only tool you think you possess 
is a hammer, all of your problems start to look a lot like nails.

The solution he encouraged me to pursue was to have two form fields on my contact form that should never get 
filled in: one that is a standard form field, but using CSS, is visually hidden from the user, and the other is
to use a hidden form field. If any one of those fields is filled in, then you know you are dealing with a spambot,
and you can take the appropriate action.

=head2 Backend code

Making this work in Dancer2 is really, really easy:

    post '/contact' => sub {
        my $spam_1 = body_parameters->get( 'spam_one' );
        my $spam_2 = body_parameters->get( 'spam_two' );

        redirect 'https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Three_Laws_of_Robotics'
            if $spam_1 || $spam_2;

        # Ok, we seem to be a real human, so do something...
        my $contact;
        my $name    = body_parameters->get( 'name'    );
        my $email   = body_parameters->get( 'email'   );
        my $subject = body_parameters->get( 'subject' );
        my $message = body_parameters->get( 'message' );

        # Now, your code to do something with the form info:
        # - Put it in a database
        # - email it
        # - etc. etc.
    };

We look to see if either of the spam-catching form fields is populated. If either one of them is populated,
we educate the bot in L<Asimov's Three Laws of Robotics|https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Three_Laws_of_Robotics>. 
If not, we are reasonably certain we are dealing with a human, and we continue on our merry way.

=head2 Front-end magic

The front end is where things get a little more interesting (note: I have deliberately omitted any styling for
the sake of brevity):

    <form method="post" action="/contact" id="contact">
        <label for="name">Name</label>
        <input type="text" name="name" id="name" placeholder="First and last name">

        <label for="email">Email Address</label>
        <input type="text" name="email" id="email" placeholder="someone@example.com">
        
        <label for="subject">Subject</label>
        <input type="text" name="subject" id="subject" placeholder="Nature of inquiry?">
        
        <label for="message">Message</label>
        <textarea name="message" id="message" placeholder="Message text"></textarea>

        <label class="visuallyhidden">Don't fill this in!<input type="text" name="spam_one" tabindex="-1"></label>
        <input type="hidden" name="spam_two">

        <input type="submit">Send Request</input>
    </form>

For the most part, it's a standard HTML form with a couple of notable exceptions:

    <label class="visuallyhidden">Don't fill this in!<input type="text" name="spam_one" tabindex="-1"></label>

This uses a special CSS class, C<visuallyhidden>, to make this form field invisible to the user. By giving it 
a C<tabindex="-1">, we make sure the user cannot accidentally tab to the field. There are still a few ways that 
field could accidentally get focus however, so we help the user here by giving it a label that says "Don't fill 
this in!"

What does C<visuallyhidden> look like?

    .visuallyhidden {
        border: 0;
        clip: rect(0 0 0 0);
        height: 1px;
        margin: -1px;
        overflow: hidden;
        padding: 0;
        position: absolute;
        width: 1px;
    }

The second preventative measure simply puts a hidden field on the page:
    
    <input type="hidden" name="spam_two">

Screen readers know to ignore this because it's hidden, and because it's hidden, the page won't show this field.
As a user, you won't ever have to fill it in.

Thankfully, a lot of spam bots are stupid, and blindly fill in any form field they see. They can't parse the CSS
in such a way that they can tell one of the fields is unusably hidden, and they often don't pay attention to
the hidden attribute... so they fall right into our trap. Enjoy your free education, spambot!

=head2 Final thoughts

Is it foolproof? No, not by a longshot. Anyone who really wants to is going to find a way to spam you anyhow, 
given a sufficient amount of time and motivation. But this will slow many down, and prevent a bunch, and 
you won't drive sighted users away from your site. In the three and a half years I have used this, only two
spambots have made it through, and my server logs indicate that many others have tried.

=head2 Author

This article has been written by Jason Crome (CromeDome) for the Perl Dancer 
Advent Calendar 2018.

=head2 Copyright

No copyright retained. Enjoy.

Jason A. Crome

