=head1 Configuring Your Dancer Applications

It's been a really exciting year for Dancer2 (and an even more exciting two
years since the last Advent calendar!), and one of the many things 
that's been improved is the configuration of Dancer2 applications. While
some configuration oddities have been addressed, some additional conveniences 
have been added as well. Let's get started and explore what's changed!

=head2 The Basics

Let's assume you are building an application that is contained in a directory
named F< appdir/>. The easiest way to configure the application there is with
a simple F< config.yml>:

    appname: mytestapp

    plugins:
        Debugger:
            enabled: 1
        Auth::Tiny:
            login_route: '/auth/login'

You are not limited to YAML, however. JSON works just as well:

    {
        "appname": "mytestapp",
        "plugins": {
            "Debugger": {
                 "enabled": 1
            },
            "Auth::Tiny": {
                "login_route": "/auth/login"
            }
        }
    }

In fact, any file format that can be read by L<Config::Any> can be used for 
your application's config file. TIMTOWTDI!

B<Note:> The examples that follow assume a YAML file format, but 
rest assured that these same techniques work with any configuration file 
format supported by Dancer2.

=head2 Some Potential Problems

In Dancer1, YAML was the only supported format, and as such, establishing a 
set order in which configuration files were read was pretty easy: F<config.yml>
followed by F<environments/$environment_name.yml>. Since Dancer2 supports 
multiple file formats, the configuration file loader looks for all files whose
name starts with F<config> and merges the results together, and the order in
which they are merged is dependent upon the order in which L<Config::Any> tells
us what file types it supports. This is not ideal because there is no reliable
order in which our configuration files are read - there is no guarantee that
F<config.yml> is read before F<config.json>... That's pretty scary in a 
production environment!

To resolve this potential gotcha, set the C<DANCER_CONFIG_EXT> environment
variable to the file extension that you wish to use for your configuration
files. For example:
    
    DANCER_CONFIG_EXT=json

If this variable is set, no other type of configation file will be read, B<only>
JSON files. Dancer2 will be nice and let you know if there are other 
configuration files of other formats present, however.

=head2 Creating Local Overrides

Sometimes you will have local overrides for or addtions to certain settings 
found in your F<config.yml> file, such as database settings, that you do not
want to commit to your version control system. Thankfully, Dancer2 accounts 
this by letting you add a file called F<config_local.yml>. Local configuration
files are always processed after the files they are named for; that is to say
that F<config.yml> is always processed first, followed by F<config_local.yml>.

So let's say that your F<config.yml> is the one above, and your F<config_local.yml>
contains this:

        DBIC:
            default:
                dsn: dbi:Pg:dbname=my_db
                schema_class: My::Schema
                user: dbuser
                password: dbpass
                options:
                    RaiseError: 1
                    PrintError: 1

Effectively, your running configuration would be this:

    appname: mytestapp

    plugins:
        Debugger:
            enabled: 1
        Auth::Tiny:
            login_route: '/auth/login'
        DBIC:
            default:
                dsn: dbi:Pg:dbname=my_db
                schema_class: My::Schema
                user: dbuser
                password: dbpass
                options:
                    RaiseError: 1
                    PrintError: 1

If you've converted to Dancer2 from Catalyst, this configuration technique 
should be familar to you.

=head2 Configuring for Multiple Deployment Environments

In reality, your local development settings will likely differ from shared 
development server settings, which will likely be different than staging
or production environment settings. To help you with this, Dancer2 lets you 
specify your runtime environment when running your application:

    DANCER_ENVIRONMENT=staging plackup bin/mytestapp.psgi

This tells Dancer2 to load F<environments/staging.yml> after F<config.yml> and,
if it exists, F<config_local.yml>.

As with the previous example, the configuration files are merged in order, with
settings in F<environments/staging.yml> taking precedence over all others. If
you had a F<environments/staging_local.yml> file, it would get read and merged
after all other files.

=head2 One Final Example: Read All the Files!

If you are using YAML-based configuration files only, and are launching an
application in a production environment, these settings:
    
    DANCER_CONFIG_EXT=yml
    DANCER_ENVIRONMENT=production

will read the following files (for sake of illustration, let's assume you use
every one of these files):

    appdir/config.yml
    appdir/config_local.yml
    appdir/environments/production.yml
    appdir/environments/production_local.yml

Settings found in the last file merged B<always> takes precedence, followed by 
settings found in the next most recently read file, and so on.

=head2 Debugging Configuration Issues

If you are ever unsure what order configuration files are being processed in,
setting the environment variable C<DANCER_CONFIG_VERBOSE=1> prior to 
launching your application will show you the order in which files have been
loaded.

=head2 Wrapping Up

Dancer2 developers gained a lot of flexibility in how to to configure their 
applications in 2016. The core team would like to give a shout-out to Jonathan
Scott Duff (aka perlpilot) for his work in making this possible.

=head2 Author

This article has been written by Jason A. Crome (CromeDome) C<cromedome@cpan.org>
for the Perl Dancer Advent Calendar 2016.

=head2 Copyright

No copyright retained. Enjoy.

