=head1 Contributing to Dancer

The Dancer community is a fun, active, and engaged community, dedicated to 
the advancement of Dancer and the community as a whole. The core team, in 
particular, relies on the community for bug reports, feature requests, and
other information to find out how Dancer is used, what needs fixing, what
needs improving, and how we can make the framework better for you. This
guide is intended to show you, at a high level, how to get involved in the 
community, and things you can do to help further Dancer development and the 
community. 

Note: This applies primarily to Dancer2, but works for Dancer1 in some 
regards. Dancer1 is not open for new feature development, but is actively
maintained in a support-only mode; bug fixes and security patches are 
incorporated in as timely a manner as possible. If you have a feature 
idea and are using Dancer1, check the docs to see if it has already 
been implemented, and if not, get hacking on Dancer2!

=head2 Report a Bug

This is perhaps the easiest way to get involved, and one of the most important
for the project. If you run into a bug while using Dancer - be it in the 
core framework, a plugin - B<please> report it! While you can report it in
Dancer's IRC channel, it is not the most reliable reporting method available
(that's not to say your report will get ignored there!).

Development of Dancer happens on Github. Your best bet for reporting a bug
in Dancer is to go to the L<issue tracker on GitHub|https://github.com/PerlDancer/Dancer2/issues>.
Before submitting a new bug, please be courteous and look to see if there
is already an open issue for the problem you are observing, and if so, add
whatever additional information you have to the existing issue.

No matter how well we test Dancer during development, there is no way for us
to find all of the potential bugs that may arise. The Core Team and the Dancer
community depends on B<you> to report bugs that you find along the way!

=head2 IRC

A great way to participate and contribute to the Dancer project is to be active
on the IRC channel. The Dancer Core Team strives to maintain a friendly and civil
environment on the channel at all times, and users of C<#dancer> would generally
agree that it's a pretty friendly place to be.

To get started, all you have to do is point your favorite IRC client to
C<irg.perl.org#dancer> and you're off and running! Ask a question, answer
a question, pitch your plugin idea... there are a number of ways for you 
to get involved.

All users are protected by our 
L<community policy and community standards|https://metacpan.org/pod/distribution/Dancer2/lib/Dancer2/Policy.pod>
document. The Core Team takes violations of this policy very, very seriously.

=head2 Sending a Documentation Patch

This is one of the easiest ways to get involved, and how yours truly got his
start in the Dancer community (so I know for a fact this is an effective 
way!). We as developers are not always the best at documenting our own work,
no matter how hard we try. We are biased, and used to looking at our work 
in a particular way, and we cannot always explain how something should be 
used in the best way, or document things in such a way that it answers all
the questons a user may have. Dancer2 is no exception.

Did you find a particular area of the docs to be hard to understand? Clarify
it and send us a pull request on GitHub. Did we forget to document a 
method or configuration setting? Send us a patch! Dancer's documentation is 
a living work, and will evolve and improve over time with the help of our
community. 

Another useful addition to the documentation is to add a recipe to the 
L<cookbook|Dancer2::Cookbook>. It's a great place to show a useful tip that
doesn't really fit elsewhere in the documentation.

=head2 Taking an Issue from the GitHub Queue

At the time of this writing, there are 82 current issues in the GitHub queue,
13 of which are labelled Beginner Suitable. A great way to help out the 
Dancer Core Team and the community is to pick up one of these issues, hack it
out, and send us a pull request. No matter what your level of expertise is,
there is something in the issue queue that will be suitable for you.

Want to get your pull request looked at even quicker? By making sure your 
pull request adequetely tests the issue you have tackled, it helps the Core
Team fast track your work to the approval stage (because we don't have to
write the tests...).

We try to evaluate pull requests as quickly as we can. Please don't get 
discouraged if it takes us a bit. A gentle reminder now and then is even ok,
but remember we are all volunteers doing this for our love of Dancer too :)

B<Note:> To get started hacking, make sure you have L<Dist::Zilla> installed.

=head2 Writing a Plugin

One of the beauties of Dancer is its extendability, and this extendability
is provided through a robust plugin system. While there are many plugins 
available in the Dancer ecosystem, there is always room for more! Do you have
an itch to scratch? Have some code that you use over and over again that
you think other members of the community might benefit from? Release that as
a plugin, throw it on CPAN, and tell the community about it!

Stuck for a plugin idea? Here's a few to get you started:

- L<Text::Handlebars> 
- L<Log::Log4Perl> 
- L<Log::Any>

=head2 Wrapping Up

We've covered some of the ways that you can get involved in Dancer project. 
No matter what level of experience you have with Perl or Dancer, everyone has
a useful idea or skill they can contribute to the Dancer project and its 
community. So what are you waiting for? :)

=head2 Author

This article has been written by Jason A. Crome (CromeDome) C<cromedome@cpan.org>
for the Perl Dancer Advent Calendar 2016.

=head2 Copyright

No copyright retained. Enjoy.

