=head1 Contributing to Dancer

The Dancer community is a fun, active, and engaged community, dedicated to 
the advancement of Dancer and the community as a whole. The core team, in 
particular, relies on the community for bug reports, feature requests, and
other information to find out how Dancer is used, what needs fixing, what
needs improving, and how we can make the framework better for you. Part 1
of this guide is intended to show you, at a high level, how to get involved
in the community, and things you can do to help further Dancer development
and the community. Part 2 of this will focus on the gory details: how to set
up a development environment for Dancer, and more.

Note: This applies primarily to Dancer2, but works for Dancer1 in some 
regards. Dancer1 is not open for new feature development, but is actively
maintained in a support-only mode; bug fixes and security patches are 
incorporated in as timely a manner as possible. If you have a feature 
idea and are using Dancer1, check the docs to see if it has already 
been implemented, and if not, get hacking on Dancer2!

=head2 Report a Bug

This is perhaps the easiest way to get involved, and one of the most important
for the project. If you run into a bug while using Dancer - be it in the 
core framework, a plugin - B<please> report it! While you can report it in
Dancer's IRC channel, it is not the most reliable reporting method available
(that's not to say your report will get ignored there!).

Development of Dancer happens on Github. Your best bet for reporting a bug
in Dancer is to go to the L<issue tracker on GitHub|https://github.com/PerlDancer/Dancer2/issues>.
WHAT ELSE GOES HERE???

No matter how well we test Dancer during development, there is no way for us
to find all of the potential bugs that may arise. The Core Team and the Dancer
community depends on B<you> to report bugs that you find along the way!

=head2 IRC

https://metacpan.org/pod/distribution/Dancer2/lib/Dancer2/Policy.pod

A great way to participate and contribute to the Dancer project is to be active
on the IRC channel.
Ask a question
Answer a question

=head2 Sending a Documentation Patch

=head2 Taking an Issue from the GitHub Queue

=head2 Proposing/Implementing a Feature

=head2 Writing a Plugin

One of the beauties of Dancer is its extendability, and this extendability
is provided through a robust plugin system. While there are many plugins 
available in the Dancer ecosystem, there is always room for more! Do you have
an itch to scratch? Have some code that you use over and over again that
you think other members of the community might benefit from? Release that as
a plugin, throw it on CPAN, and tell the community about it!

Stuck for a plugin idea? Here's a few to get you started:

- Handlebars plugin
- Log4Perl plugin
- Redis? CHI?

=head2 Wrapping Up

We've covered some of the ways that you can get involved in Dancer project. 
The next article in this series will give you the gory details, such as
working with L<Dist::Zilla>, how the core team decides on what gets 
included, and more!

=head2 Author

Jason A. Crome (CromeDome) C<cromedome@cpan.org>
