=head1 Dancer for static web sites

=head2 Static?

To me, many "dynamic" sites web aren't really dynamic and could be
generated with a commit/push hook whenever the source data is updated.
RSS feeds can be generated from the list of generated files and their
creation dates. If you have enough disk space, it's possible to generate
all image sizes for a picture gallery in advance. And so on.

Having a static web site ensures maximum speed (any webserver can handle
static files) and security (without forms or databases, there is little
chance for an SQL injection attack to be successful).

With the return of JavaScript and the advent of AJAX, most of the
"dynamism" of web sites comes from the web site authors' ability to
use CSS and one of the many JavaScript frameworks available to animate,
present, filter and download data on the client side (thus saving your
resources)

=head2 Inspiration

I was really inspired by Jekyll (L<http://jekyllrb.com/>), a "blog-aware,
static website generator". But I'm not much of a blogger, and the web
sites I wanted to generate needed to produce some "global" pages that
depended on the fully generated site. For instance, a website consisting
of a collection of articles, could have a tag cloud or an author scoreboard
and still be fully static, as these files only need to be generated when
an article is added or updated.

I first tried to write my own generic static website generator (most of
the code was produced during the Vienna Perl QA Hackathon, in April 2010).
And thus I<Papery> was born. But being generic is hard, and the project
stalled quickly.

At OSDC.fr, in October 2010, I had the opportunity to talk to a lot of
people, including Alexis Sukrieh, Dancer's author. The idea of generating
static websites using a dynamic framework appealed to a lot of people,
and we brainstormed the name for a Dancer implementation during the
conference (many thanks to Josette Garcia, from O'Reilly UK, for providing
me with the exact English term I was looking for!)

Once you have a good name, the project almost writes itself.

=head2 Concepts and workflow

FIXME

=head2 Author

This article has been written by Philippe Bruhat (BooK) for the Perl Dancer
Advent Calendar 2010.

=head2 Reviewers

Proofreading and typo-fixing by Alexis Sukrieh.

=head2 Copyright

Copyright (C) 2010 by Philippe Bruhat (BooK).

=cut

