=head1 Dancer deployment: Apache's mod_proxy and Nginx


=head2 Notice

I'm not a networking guru. What follows is what I think I've learn
asking in C<#plack> and C<#dancer> (L<irc://irc.perl.org>, thanks people, you really
rock) and reading the documentation on the net. I apologize in advance
if something is not 100% correct.

=head2 Scenario

So, you used the L<Dancer> framework to build your new shiny web
application. Now it's time to deploy it. You have a server with a very
common setup: Apache2 with mod_php, which serves other sites. You read
L<Dancer::Deployment> and think: OK, no problem, just use Apache's
mod_proxy and L<Starman> and you will be fine.

Wrong! You're not fine. You're indeed in big troubles.

=head2 The problems (first part)

First, mod_proxy and Starman seem not to play well together: from the L<starman>'s documentation:

=over 2

--disable-keepalive

Disable Keep-alive persistent connections. It is an useful
workaround if you run Starman behind a broken frontend proxy that
tries to pool connections more than a number of backend workers
(i.e. Apache mpm_prefork + mod_proxy).

=back

From Apache's
L<documentation|http://httpd.apache.org/docs/2.2/mod/mod_proxy.html#envsettings>):

=over 2

For circumstances where mod_proxy is sending requests to an origin
server that doesn't properly implement keepalives or HTTP/1.1, there
are two environment variables that can force the request to use
HTTP/1.0 with no keepalive.

=back

Ok, no problem, there are the workarounds, but it doesn't look a
promising setup.

=head2 The problems (second part)

The prefork servers (like Starman and Apache mpm-prefork) work in a
straightforward way: they accept a connection, serve the file or the
output, when the transmission is over they pick up another one. To
avoid the creation of bottlenecks they spawn more processes.

As you may see, there is a big problem. If you have pages or files
which are long, say 500kb, or a few Mb, which is not really uncommon,
and it's I<very> common in my case, if the clients have slow
connections, the processes will not pick up another connection until
the page is served. The L<slowloris|http://lwn.net/Articles/338407/>)
issue is known (well, you'll know it when you encounter the problem)
is a malicious attack that exploits this problem. There are some
workarounds (again), but you're forgetting something: the 56k people.
Maybe they are not so common, but why they should block your server?
Are you going to ban them? No way!

But, you think, you put a proxy in front of Starman exactly for this
reason: to avoid binding Starman for too long. It's the whole point of
the proxy: the backend works fast, transmits the data, and next! It's
a proxy's matter to work with the crowd out there.

There are 2, big problems with mod_proxy + mpm-prefork:

=over 2

=item it's a I<prefork>

so if the connections are slow, the bottleneck is
there. You can create a Denial of Service with a one-liner from the
shell over a 56k. You could increase the number of workers, but
it's always a finite number.

=item its I<buffering> does not work as expected

it doesn't buffer I<at all> and Starman's workers (which are always
less than the Apache's workers because they are more memory-hungry)
are tied until the request is served. This defeats the whole point of
having a proxy.

=back


The workarounds just scale the problem: increase the workers until the
machine have enough memory for them. Believe me, it's easy to eat all
the memory with a couple of applications, down this road.

Or, let Starman to serve only little dynamic pages, let Apache do the
rest (if possible) and hope for the best. The problem is still there, anyway.

To test this problem is trivial:

 for i in `seq 0 100` ; do wget -q --limit-rate 1 -O /dev/null \
   http://target.tld & 2> /dev/null ; done

Open a browser, and I bet you can't open the page.

This is a malicious attack, but the same problem happens with the 56k
users or requests for big files. It's all working as expected, but the
prefork problem and the lack (or just ridiculously low level) of
buffering are just blocking the web-server.

You think: yes, OK, nothing new, my php applications already have this
problem, and I can survive. Wrong! Because you usually have a Starman
server for each application, and a machine without huge memory have
limited resources. So, count, how many children Starman can spawn?
They are usually less then the Apache's workers. When Apache is
proxying, it binds them until the request is served.

Well, I hope you get the point. You can continue with workarounds or do the right thing: drop Apache as proxy, and use a real one: Nginx

=head2 Nginx as proxy

Why Nginx?

Because Nginix doesn't suffer the slowloris problem B<and> does a
proper buffering, so the 2 problems are gone now. Plack and Nginx play
very well together, and it's the commonly recommended setup.

The setup is explained in detail in the L<Dancer::Deployment>, so I
won't repeat it here.

=head2 Legacy php sites

But now you have to manage the old php sites, which can't run on
nginx. There are various setups, but the B<quickest> is something like
this:

1) Make Apache to listen to 127.0.0.1:8080

2) For each server add this Nginx configuration:

    server {
        listen 80;
        server_name your.hostname.tld
        root /your/root/
        location / {
                proxy_set_header Host $http_host;
                proxy_set_header X-Forwarded-Host $http_host;
                proxy_set_header X-Real-IP $remote_addr;
                proxy_set_header X-Forwarded-For $proxy_add_x_forwarded_for;
                proxy_pass http://127.0.0.1:8080;
        }   
    }

Which basically pass I<everything> to Apache. You can optimize it by
letting nginx to serve the static files, like the images, of course. Read the doc, if you're interested. I found this interesting: L<http://kbeezie.com/view/apache-with-nginx/>

=head2 Author

This article has been written by Marco Pessotto (a.k.a. melmothX) in 2012 as a personal note and reviewed for the Perl Dancer Advent Calendar 2012. The original is located at L<LAltroMondo Wiki|http://laltromondo.dynalias.net/~iki/informatica/soft/dancer_and_apache/>

No copyright, public domain.





