=head1 Optimizing Dancer2 PT. 3

After improving our web server and web server configurations in our
previous article, we can now dive deeper into our stack. There is much
to gain by deciding how we configure our stack, what technologies we
use, and how we architect our platform.

=head2 Offloading tasks

Have you ever implemented a queue system in a web application? Of
course you have! We all have! However, this proves to be a common
mistake that must be rectified if we seek to have a fast web
application.

Queues are not the only example of trying to accomplish as much as
possible within the web application instead of offloading it to
other components which are more suitable at their given task.

=over 4

=item * Queues

Queues are enticing to write since they seem simple at first. We
C<push> to an array, C<pop> on the other side, and run.
Unfortunately, a proper queue system needs to take into account
working across data centers, journaling and crash recovery, and
even multiple processes for work.

We recommend using a proper queue or proper DB meant for storing
and dealing with queues. You can use RabbitMQ for queuing or if
you want to use a worker system, you can store your work in
Redis.

Either way, you shouldn't implement such a grant task yourself
inside your web application. It just won't cut it.

=item * Scheduled tasks (cron jobs)

Many tasks are performed asynchronously in the web server since they
take a long time to run. However, it makes them more fragile,
error-prone, and opaque, making it hard to trace and debug.

Instead, scheduled task runners are available on common operating
systems.

=item * Caching

There is L<Plack::Middleware::Cache> available, but at the end
of the day, caching can definitely be done better by any proper
caching server.

We recommend Varnish.

=back

=head2 Preloading modules

Our web applications tend to use many modules, some of which quite
heavy. Most web servers fork in order to handle multiple workers.
But why waste the start-up time of heavy modules on each fork of the
web server? This is what preloading is for.

If you load modules before you start your web server, you can allow
the web server to fork with the modules already loaded in memory,
and to share that memory.

While this saves a lot of memory, it also saves the CPU required
on every fork generator in order to load the modules.

    # app.psgi
    use MyApp;

    # preloading
    use Moose ();
    use DBIx::Class ();
    use AnotherBigModule ();

    MyApp->to_app;

=head2 Faster headers everywhere

Handling headers is one of the most common tasks performed in a
web request. It is done by the caching layer, the reverse proxy,
the web server, and your application.

The most common module in Perl to handle headers is the old
L<HTTP::Headers>, and I<old> is right. L<Plack> moved to a faster
version, aptly named L<HTTP::Headers::Fast>, which tries to maintain
compatibility but improve the speed. It is about 20% faster, which
is already a major benefit, since L<Plack> an make many uses of
headers.

Dancer2 internally uses L<HTTP::Headers::Fast> in order to assure
faster results, but you can take this one step further by changing
what Dancer2 (and Plack) will use, along with any other component
in your web application.

If you load L<HTTP::XSHeaders> early in your application, it will
override the other HTTP libraries (namely L<HTTP::Headers> and
L<HTTP::Headers::Fast>) and changes their code (and subsequently)
any code that calls it) to a much higher performant C-based
implementation of headers.

    # app.psgi
    use HTTP::XSHeaders;
    use MyApp;

    ...

=head2 Reduce I/O with loggers and sessions

Logging and session reading and writing are also frequently performed
actions. It also involves I/O, writing to disk, or involve a network
operation. Those can be slow.

Make sure to maintain a useful logging level in your application,
not writing at all levels, to prevent excessive writing to disk
or network, and use a fast logger engine.

Additionally, usse a memory-based session storage, not the L<YAML>
or L<JSON> ones, since they both write to disk and serialize - two
unnecessary expensive actions.

=head2 Faster templating

If you're not writing a web service, you are likely to be using
templates. Rendering a template is a simple task, but when using
templating frequently, it starts to take more time.

If speed is crucial, it is a key point to improve. We recommend
using L<Text::XSlate> for a blazing fast templating system.

=head2 Middlewares aren't everything

Middlewares are quite beneficial. They allow use to split the
work between layers and keep layers simple and thin. However, they
are much more expensive than we realize.

Each middleware call requires two additional subroutine calls
on every request. While calling subroutines in perl 5.24 has been
considerably improved in speed (30% faster!), it is still a cost
worth realizing and possibly amending.

In many cases middlewares need access to information you already
have in your application. Benchmark before you either decide to
move to middleware, or when contemplating removing them.

=head2 Reduce assets cost

Serving our assets through a CDN or other caching server, or even
through our reverse proxy is faster, but we take this one step
further by improving the asset files themselves.

For images, you can reduce the size and amount of required file
transfers by using sprites.

For Javascript files, you can both concatenate the files together
and reduce their size by minifying them.

=head2 Coming next

Our next article in this series will deal directly with our application
code. How can we write faster code in order to speed up our
application?
