=head1 Writing ReST webservices with Dancer

It's really easy to write ReST webservices with Dancer.

A ReST application is defined by:

=over 4

=item a route to a resource

=item an HTTP verb

=item a format

=back

=head2 Serializers

Dancer comes with some helper functions, in order to help you to serialize your Perl data strcture to something like JSON or XML.

The core provides serializers for:

=over 4

=item B<JSON> (to_json and from_json)

=item B<XML> (to_xml and from_xml)

=item B<YAML> (to_yaml and from_yaml)

=back

With these serializers, you can write:

    get '/user/:id' => sub {
        my $user = $schema->resultset('Users')->find(params->{id});
        content_type 'application/json';
        return to_json { id => params->{id}, name => $user->name };
    };

=head2 Let Dancer handle the serialization

=head3 Using JSON

Now that we've seen how to do serialization manually, lets make Dancer do the
work for us.

You can configure your application to have a default serializer:

    set serializer => 'JSON';

Now, you can define a route like this:

     get '/user/:id' => sub {
         my $id = params->{id};
         my $user = $schema->resultset('Users')->find($id);
         return { id => $id, name => $user->name };
     };

As you can see, we no longer need to call the B<content_type> and B<to_json> functions. When you set a default serializer and your route returns an arrayref or hashref, Dancer will check if you have a default serializer defined. If that is the case,  it will serialize the response to the appropriate format and set the correct content type.

=head3 Let the user select the format.

If you have installed the required dependancies for using all the supported serializers by Dancer (XML::Simple, YAML and JSON), you can even let the user choose in which format he prefers to have the content of the request. For this, you'll need to set the serliazer to B<mutable>. From now on, you can select your format by defining the correct value in the HTTP header of your request (Content-Type when doing a POST or PUT operation, and Accept-Type for GET and DELETE).

So, if we take our previous example, by setting the serializer to B<mutable>, we can do the following:

    $ curl http://localhost:5000/1
    {"name":"franck","id":"1"}

    $ curl -H 'Accept-Type: text/x-yaml' http://localhost:5000/1
    ---
    id: 1
    name: franck

    $ curl -H 'Accept-Type: text/xml' http://localhost:5000/1
    <data name="franck" id="1" />
     
=head2 Dancer::Plugin::REST

There is an excellent plugin available to help you to write a ReST application: Dancer::Plugin::REST. With this one, you'll be able to declare route to access to resources, but also declare how you want to handle the format.

=head3 Format

As we have seen, you can already define the format by setting the B<serializer> option to a certain value (JSON, YAML, mutable, ...). The plugin add another way: by appending the format to your request. This mean you can declare this kind of route:

    prepare_serializer_for_format;

    get '/user/:id.:format' => sub {
        my $user = $schema->resultset('Users')->find(params->{id});
        return { id => params->{id}, name => $user->name };
    };

    $ curl http://localhost:5000/1.json
    {"name":"franck","id":"1"}

    $ curl -H 'Accept-Type: text/xml' http://localhost:5000/1.xml
    <data name="franck" id="1" />

=head3 Resources

As stated at the begining of the article, with ReST you defined routes to access resources. So let's do this:

    resource user => 
        'get' => \&on_get_user,
        'create' => \&on_create_user,
        'delete' => \&on_delete_user,
        'update' => \&on_update_user;

    sub on_get_user {
        ...
        status_ok({ user => $users->id });
    }

    sub on_create_user {
        ...
        status_created({user => $user->id});
    }

    ...

=head3 Helpers

The plugin add also some helpers to return an appropriate HTTP status to your request.

    post '/user/' => sub {
        my $user = $schema->resultset('Users')->create(...);
        status_created({ id => $user->id, name => $user->name });
    };

This will return a new HTTP response with a status to 201.
    
=head2 Credits

Most of the work done on the serializers have been inspired by the excellent plugin Catalyst::Action::REST. Thanks to all the authors of this module.

=head2 Author

This article has been written by Franck Cuny for the Perl Dancer Advent
Calendar 2010.

=head2 Copyright

Copyright (C) 2010 by Franck Cuny C<< <franck@lumberjaph.net> >>.

