=head1 A first app with Dancer 2

In the previous article we've seen how concrete Dancer 2 is, already. It's not
something in the air, it's real and is powering the website you're reading right
now. 

The ecosystem still needs to be fully ported but it doesn't prevent you from
starting a webapp with Dancer 2. Actually, that's the best way you could help
Dancer 2 moving forward!

In this article we'll see how to build an application with Dancer2, from
scratch. We'll try to show off here one of the most important benefit of the
design change in Dancer's core: its application scoping.

I'm going to harm a little bit Dancer 1 in this demonstration but as we say in
french: I<Qui aime bien chatie bien> (Well, I don't know how to translate that,
sorry!). 

Anyway! The main idea behind this article is to show off how the design changes of
Dancer 2 will make your life easier, as an app developer. So we'll do something
simple with Dancer 2 and see how Dancer 1 deals with it. That's - I think - a
good way to understand I<why> the rewrite was necessary.

But first, we need an app!

=head2 Let's start with a single-file app

First, we need to create the structure for the application dir. Of course, we
can keep it simple, the I<micro-framework> way:

    $ cat > app.pl
    #!/usr/bin/env perl
    use Dancer 2.0;

    get '/' => sub { 'hello 2!' };

    start;

It's a valid Dancer 2 app, of course, but that's not very interesting, it's a
hello world, and as Dancer 2's DSL is fully compatible with Dancer 1, there is
nothing new here.

Let's create a real appdir structure. We could use the C<dancer> helper provided
with Dancer 1, but I'd like to show you how to do that by hand, there is clearly
not much to do.

=head2 A more structured application

First of all, the structure:

    mkdir -p lib bin views/layouts public t

Now, let's create a basic layout and a view.

    cat > views/layouts/main.tt
    <html>
    <head><title>DemoApp</title></head>
    <body>
      <h1>DemoApp>/h1>
      [% content %]
    </body>
    </html>

If you know Dancer 1, you should have spotted something already. Got it? Yes,
the L<Template> tags! We're back to TT's default: C<[%> and C<%]>. That was one of
the most wanted change since Dancer has been out. Dancer 2 is a good opportunity
to drop that cosmetic change.

OK, we have a layout, let's create the first view.

    cat > views/index.tt
    Hello Dancer 2

Now, the main app, to create the first route.

    cat > lib/DemoApp.pm
    package DemonApp;
    use Dancer 2.0;

    get '/' => sub {
        template 'index';
    };

    1;

And finally, the starter script.

    cat > bin/app.pl
    #!/usr/bin/env perl

    use Dancer 2.0;
    use DemoApp;

    start;

Again, here, you cannot tell the difference with Dancer 1. It's just the same.
So that's not very interesting. Hmm, wait, if we want to see a bit of the guts
of Dancer 2, we already can.

Let's start the application with the core debug flag:

    $ DANCER_DEBUG_CORE=1 perl -I../Dancer2/lib ./bin/app.pl 
    core: binding import method to main
    core: binding app to main
    core: exporting DSL symbols for main
    core: binding import method to DemoApp
    core: binding app to DemoApp
    core: exporting DSL symbols for DemoApp
    core: [DemoApp] -> get(/, CODE(0x2170aa0))
    core: [main] -> start()
    HTTP::Server::Simple::PSGI: You can connect to your server at http://localhost:3000/

That's interesting because you can see here how everything is scoped properly.
There are already two "apps" (C<Dancer::Core::App> objects), one for main
(C<bin/app.pl>) and one for C<DemoApp.pm>.

Any call to a DSL keyword will be logged, with its arguments. Like you can see
above for C<get> and C<start>. We also see from which app they are called.
Imagine all the help it can provide when debugging your app. 
    
If I hit my app, I should see a call to template, as my C</> route uses it:

    $ curl http://0:3000/
    core: [DemoApp] -> template(index)
    ...

We clearly see that everything is scoped, let's try to demonstrate the benefits
of that.

=head2 Scoped applications

Let's say that I want my application to provide a set of routes which share a
common set configuration. For instance, I want all the routes here to disable
the layout and to have a prefix.

Also I want all these routes to be available only under a specific environment.

A simple and straight-forward example is to use a I<debug> namespace: We want a
set of route for our debugging purposes, so we're going to add
C<DemoApp::DebugRoutes>:

    mkdir -p lib/DemoApp
    cat > lib/DemoApp/DebugRoutes.pm
    package DemoApp::DebugRoutes;

    use Dancer 2.0;

    # First we add a prefix
    prefix '/debug';

    # Make sure we don't have a layout set here
    set layout => undef;

    # Filter requestes for developnment env only
    hook 'before' => sub {
        if (dancer_app->environment ne 'development') {
            status 404;
            return halt;
        }
    };

    # a first route
    get '/env' => sub {
        to_dumper(request->env);
    };

    1;

Now, use that new set of routes in the main app.

    # in lib/DemoApp.pm
    ...
    use DemoApp::DebugRoutes;

Great, let's test that. We should see the first route as before, and of
course we should see C<DebugRoutes> in the debug output:

    $ DANCER_DEBUG_CORE=1 perl -I../Dancer2/lib ./bin/app.pl 
    [...]
    core: [DemoApp::DebugRoutes] -> prefix(/debug)
    core: [DemoApp::DebugRoutes] -> set(layout, <undef>)
    core: [DemoApp::DebugRoutes] -> hook(before, CODE(0x1f54cd8))
    core: [DemoApp::DebugRoutes] -> get(/env, CODE(0x1f7b588))
    core: [DemoApp] -> get(/, CODE(0x1f32320))
    core: [main] -> start()
    HTTP::Server::Simple...

Looks great, let's test it. The first route should remain unchanged.

    $ curl -i http://0:3000/
    core: [DemoApp] -> template(index)
    HTTP/1.0 200 OK
    Server: Perl Dancer
    Content-Length: 85
    Content-Type: text/html; charset=UTF-8

    <html>
    <head>
      <title>DemoApp</title>
    </head>
    <body>
    Hello Dancer 2

    </body>
    </html>
        
OK, so far so good. Now, let's try the C</debug/env> route we added. It's under
the prefix C</debug>, should not provide the layout and should only be available
under development env (which is the case now):

    $ curl http://0:3000/debug/env
    core: [DemoApp::DebugRoutes] -> dancer_app()
    core: [DemoApp::DebugRoutes] -> request()
    core: [DemoApp::DebugRoutes] -> to_dumper(HASH(0x2148ed0))
    HTTP/1.0 200 OK
    [...]    
    $VAR1 = {
          'psgi.multiprocess' => 0,
          'SERVER_NAME' => '0.0.0.0',
          'SCRIPT_NAME' => '',
          'PATH_INFO' => '/debug/env',
    [...]    

Looks to work!

Now, let's restart the app under a different environment, the C<before> hook
should block the route while not doing it for the main app.

    $ DANCER_ENVIRONMENT=prod \
    DANCER_DEBUG_CORE=1 \
    perl -I../Dancer2/lib ./bin/app.pl &
    [...]

    $ curl -i http://0:3000/debug/env
    core: [DemoApp::DebugRoutes] -> dancer_app()
    core: [DemoApp::DebugRoutes] -> status(404)
    core: [DemoApp::DebugRoutes] -> halt()
    HTTP/1.0 404 Not Found
    Server: Perl Dancer
    Content-Length: 0
    Content-Type: text/html

And the main route still works (meaning the filter doesn't get into our way
elsewhere):

    $ curl http://0:3000/ -I
    core: [DemoApp] -> template(index)
    HTTP/1.0 200 OK

Yup. It works. But I<it's the same with Dancer 1> you say? Well let's see. I'm
going to restart the app with Dancer 1 and do the same tests.

Any clue what will mess up?

Well, no need to go very far, the C</> route has disappeared because the C<prefix>
statement is global (as everything you do in Dancer 1). So if you load
C<DemoApp::DebugRoutes> I<before> defining the C</> route, the C<prefix> will
propagate to all the remaining route to define...

So with Dancer 1, the C</> route became... C</debug> (a prefix C</debug> combined
with a C</> route):

    $ curl -i http://0:3000/debug
    [...]
    X-Powered-By: Perl Dancer 1.311
    
    Hello Dancer 2

And of course the layout has disappeared as well, as it's disabled in the
C<DebugRoutes> package.

As you can expect, the C</> is now a C<404>:

    $ curl -I http://0:3000/
    [...]
    HTTP/1.0 404 Not Found

Broken!

This kind of loading time sequencing is crucial in a Dancer 1 application. In
Dancer 2, thanks to the proper scoping of the core, it's not a problem anymore.

=head2 Author

This article has been written by Alexis Sukrieh for the Perl Dancer Advent
Calendar 2012.

