=head1 Dancer::Session::Redis - Writing a session engine for Dancer2

In order to continue presenting all the good things about Dancer2, I wanted a 
good reason to show how the session handling is done. On the other hand, I 
didn't want to explain how the code is designed without something concrete to
explain. So I came with the idea of writing a new session engine for Dancer2,
explaining all the steps here.

Moreover, after having searched a bit, it appears that there is no Redis backend
for storing session so that's a perfect opportunity to write it! Let's go!

=head2 A word about Redis

I suppose you already know Redis, if you don't, well, you should! It's a blazing
fast NoSQL key/value store. It can reach amazing performances like a rate of
100,000 requests per second. Using it as a session storage to make sure multiple 
interface servers can share the same information is very common.

Anything stored in Redis is serialized as a JSON string. 

=head2 Session engines in Dancer2

We've already seen that Dancer 2 is entirely written with L<Moo>. So you won't
be surprised if I tell you that in Dancer 2, the engines are actually roles. So
if we want to write a session backend for Dancer 2, we need to consume the
C<Dancer::Core::Role::SessionFactory> role. Why not C<Session> instead of
C<SessionFactory> you ask? Well, it's the major design change (which I'm very
happy with) if you compare to how things are done in Dancer1.

In Dancer 1, we have one object, a Dancer::Session:Something. That object will
contain the session itself (expiration time, ID, content) and the session
storage itself (for instance for YAML, you'll find here a C<session_dir>
attribute).

It's probably not shocking at first sight, I presume because Dancer 1 still
works like that and I never heard someone complaning about it, after almost 3
years.

But recently, I was facing an issue with sessions in Dancer 2 and I started
thinking about how things are done, and I realized the design could be better by
far. Indeed, it came to my mind that we have actually two very different things
here: the session itself, and its storage backend.

There are two concepts: a C<Session> class, that contains generic information
like an expiration time, a content, and ID and that is agnostic of
how it is stored; and a SessionFactory class, which describes how to create,
update and delete a C<Session> object.

So in Dancer 2, a session backend consumes the role
C<Dancer::Core::Role::SessionFactory>.

Let's do that!

=head2 Dancer::Session::Redis

First thing to do is to create the class for our session engine, we'll name it,
abviously C<Dancer::Session::Redis>:

    package Dancer::Session::Redis;
    use Moo;
    with 'Dancer::Core::Role::SessionFactory';

First, we want our backend to have a handle over a Redis connection. To do that,
we'll create an attribute C<redis> that will do all the boring bits for us,
lazily.

    use JSON;
    use Redis;
    use Dancer::Core::Types; # brings helper for types
    
    has redis => (
        is => 'rw',
        isa => InstanceOf['Redis'],
        lazy => 1,
        builder => '_build_redis',
    );

The lazy attribute is very interesting, it says to Moo that this attribute will
be built (initialized) only when called the first time. It means that the
connection to Redis won't be opened until necessary.

    sub _build_redis {
        my ($self) = @_;
        Redis->new(
            server => $self->server,
            password => $self->password,
            encoding => undef,
        );
    }

As you can see, we want to create two more attributes: C<server> and
C<password>. Dancer 2 will pass anything defined in the config to the engine
creation. So for instance, if we have:

    # config.yml
    ...
    engines:
      session:
        Redis:
          server: foo.mydomain.com
          password: S3Cr3t

The server and password entries will be passed to the constructor of the Redis
session engine, as expected. That's another sign of the proper design of Dancer
2, no more settings shared among all the packages, the Redis engine only knows
about itself, it has absolutely no idea of what a Dancer config is.

    has server => (is => 'ro', required => 1);
    has password => (is => 'ro');

The role requires that we implement C<_retrieve>, C<_flush>, C<_destroy> and
C<_sessions>. 

The first one, C<_retrieve> is supposed to return a session object for a session
ID it's passed. In our case, it's pretty easy, our sessions are going to be
stored in Redis, the session ID will be the key, the session the value. So
retrieving is as easy as doing a get and decoding the JSON string returned:

    sub _retrieve {
        my ($self, $session_id) = @_;
        my $json = $self->redis->get($session_id);
        my $hash = from_json( $json );
        return bless $hash, 'Dancer::Core::Session';
    }

Now we should implement the C<_flush> method, which is called by Dancer when the
session needs to be stored in the backend. That's actually a write to Redis. The
method receives a C<Dancer::Core::Session> object and is supposed to store it.

    sub _flush {
        my ($self, $session) = @_;
        my $json = to_json( { %{ $session } } );
        $self->redis->set($session->id, $json);
    }

Now, the C<_destroy> method that is supposed to remove a session from the
backend, the session ID is passed. 

Easy one, we should delete the key from Redis.

    sub _destroy {
        my ($self, $session_id) = @_;
        $self->redis->del($session_id);
    }

And finally, the last one, the C<_sessions> method which is supposed to list all
the session IDs currently stored in the backend. It's in our case as stupid as
listing all the keys that Redis has.

    sub _sessions {
        my ($self) = @_;
        my @keys = $self->redis->keys('*');
        return \@keys;
    }

Voilà. The session engine is ready. Let's play with it now.

=head2 Behind the C<session> keyword

It should be clear now that a session storage system is not the same thing as a
session itself. Let's look at how things work when you use the C<session>
keyword in Dancer.

First of all, keep in mind that when Dancer 2 executes a route handler to
process a request, it creates a C<Dancer::Core::Context> object. That object is
designed to handle all the volatile information of the current request: the
environment, the request object, the newborn response object, the cookies...

This context is passed to all the components of Dancer that can play with it, to
build the response. For instance, a before filter will receive that context
object.

That where we'll find the session handle for the current client, in the context.
The beauty of it is that it's actually a lazy attribute, and its builder has
one thing to do: look if the client has a C<dancer.session> cookie, and if so, 
try to C<retrieve> the session from the storage engine, with the value of the 
cookie (the session ID).

    has session => (
        is      => 'rw',
        isa     => Session,
        lazy    => 1,
        builder => '_build_session',
    );

    sub _build_session {
        my ($self) = @_;
        my $session;

        # Find the session engine
        my $engine = $self->app->setting('session');
        croak "No session engine defined, cannot use session."
          if ! defined $engine;

        # find the session cookie if any
        my $session_id;
        my $session_cookie = $self->cookie('dancer.session');
        if (defined $session_cookie) {
            $session_id = $session_cookie->value;
        }
       
        # if we have a session cookie, try to retrieve the session
        if (defined $session_id) {
            eval { $session = $engine->retrieve(id => $session_id) };
            croak "Fail to retreive session: $@" 
              if $@ && $@ !~ /Unable to retrieve session/;
        }

        # create the session if none retrieved
        return $session ||= $engine->create();
    }

So the very first time C<session> is called, the object is either retrieved
from the backend, or a new C<Dancer::Core::Session> is created, and stored in
the context.

Then, a C<before> filter makes sure a cookie C<dancer.session> is added to the
headers.

    # Hook to add the session cookie in the headers, if a session is defined
    $self->add_hook(Dancer::Core::Hook->new(
        name => 'core.app.before_request',
        code => sub {
            my $context = shift;

            # make sure an engine is defined, if not, nothing to do
            my $engine = $self->setting('session');
            return if ! defined $engine;

            # push the session in the headers
            $context->response->push_header('Set-Cookie',
                $context->session->cookie->to_header);
        }
    ));

At this time, the user's code comes into play, using the C<session> keyword,
which is actually that simple:

    sub session {
        my ($self, $key, $value) = @_;

        my $session = $self->context->session;
        croak "No session available, a session engine needs to be set"
            if ! defined $session;

        # return the session object if no key
        return $session if @_ == 1;

        # read if a key is provided
        return $session->read($key) if @_ == 2;

        # write to the session
        $session->write($key => $value);
    }

And to conclude, an C<after> filter is set to call the C<flush> method of the
storage backend. Indeed, the C<write> calls you see above do not change the
sesssion in the storage system, they only alter the object itself. That's a
major improvement if you compare to Dancer 1, because as everything is mixed and
less well decoupled, in Dancer 1, a write to the session is also a flush to the
backend system.

Here, we now that we flush exactly once per request, when the response is ready.

    # Hook to flush the session at the end of the request, this way, we're sure we
    # flush only once per request
    $self->add_hook(
        Dancer::Core::Hook->new(
            name => 'core.app.after_request',
            code => sub {
                # make sure an engine is defined, if not, nothing to do
                my $engine = $self->setting('session');
                return if ! defined $engine;
                return if ! defined $self->context;
                $engine->flush(session => $self->context->session);
            },
        )
    );

=head2 Code for this article

The code of the session backend described here has been released on
L<GitHub|https://github.com/sukria/Dancer-Session-Redis/blob/master/lib/Dancer/Session/Redis.pm>.

It's not released on CPAN yet because we'll wait for Dancer 2 to be there first,
for obvious reasons.

=head2 Author

This article has been written by Alexis Sukrieh for the Perl Dancer Advent
Calendar 2012.

