=head1 Using DBIx::Class within a Dancer application

C<DBIx::Class>, also known as C<DBIC>, is one of the many Perl ORM 
(I<Object Relational Mapper>), but it's commonly recognized as the best 
and most widely used.

This is a nice presentation from Leo : L<http://www.slideshare.net/ranguard/dbixclass-beginners-presentation>

Basically, C<DBIC> allows you to interact with your SQL Database without writing any SQL.

To do that, you need a set of B<Schema classes> that describes your database
structure. Then you can use DBIC to create, update, delete, search, and do many
more things on the data that are in your database.

From a Dancer web application, it is very easy to use DBIC, thanks to
C<Dancer::Plugin::DBIC>. This article will implement a simple web application to
demonstrate the use of C<Dancer::Plugin::DBIC>.

=head2 Simple example

Let's consider a simple Dancer application that allows to search for authors or
books. The application is connected to a database, that contains authors, and
their books. The website will have one single page with a form, to query books
or authors, and display the result.

To keep this article short, the HTML will be simplistic, and the implementation
will be a bit stupid. However, I'll try to explain how to properly use
Dancer::Plugin::DBIC.

The application will be structured as follow:

=over

=item *

a Dancer route C</search> to handle the request, and decide if there is any
search to perform, and send the results to the view

=item *

a view, that will display the search form, and the results if any.

=item *

a set of models, linked to a database, that will contain the books and authors.
These models will be created using DBIC

=back

=head2 The basics

=head3 Create the application

Okay, that's easy enough:

  $> dancer -a bookstore

=head3 Change template type

We'll want to loop on results and display authors and books, and it's easier to
use Template Toolkit to do that, rather than the default
C<Dancer::Template::Simple>.

So let's specify in the configuration that we'll use Template Toolkit as
template engine:

  # add in bookstore/config.yml
  template: template_toolkit

=head3 Create a view

We need a view to display the search form, and below, the results, if any. The
results will be fed by the route to the view as an C<arrayref> of results.
Each result is a I<hashref>, with a C<author> key containing the name of the
author, and a C<books> key containing an I<arrayref> of strings : the books
names.

That explanation is probably hard to follow, so here is an example, much easier:

  # example of a list of results
  [ { author => 'author 1',
      books => [ 'book 1', 'book 2' ],
    },
    { author => 'author 2',
      books => [ 'book 3', 'book 4' ],
    }
  ]

So, what will look the view like? Here is a simple example, displaying the
search form, and the results, if any. It's written in Template Toolkit, except
that Dancer changes the C<[‰ %]> format to be C<< <% %> >> instead.

  # bookstore/views/search.tt
  <p>
  <form action="/search">
  Search query: <input type="text" name="query" />
  </form>
  </p>
  <br>  
  
  <% IF query.length %>
    <p>Search query was : <% query %>.</p>
    <% IF results.size %>
      Results:
      <ul>
      <% FOREACH result IN results %>
        <li>Author: <% result.author %>
        <ul>
        <% FOREACH book IN result.books %>
          <li><% book %>
        <% END %>
        </ul>
      <% END %>
    <% ELSE %>
      No result
    <% END %>
  <% END %>

=head3 Create a route

Let's create a simple Dancer route, to be added in the C<bookstore.pm> module:

  # add in bookstore/lib/bookstore.pm
  get '/search' => sub {
      my $query = params->{query};
      my @results = ();
      if (length $query) {
          @results = _perform_search($query);
      }
      template 'search', { query => $query,
                           results => \@results,
                         };
  };

It's rather simple: get the parameter called I<query>, if it exists perform the
search, and in any case, call the C<search> view.

So, as you can see, we need to write the C<_perform_search()> method. But
before we do that, let's create the database

=head3 Create a database

I'll go with SQLite, as it fits well with the aim of simplicity of this
example. Let's create the SQLite file database:

  $> sqlite3 bookstore.db
  CREATE TABLE author( 
    id INTEGER PRIMARY KEY AUTOINCREMENT NOT NULL, 
    firstname text default '' not null, 
    lastname text not null);

  CREATE TABLE books(
    id INTEGER PRIMARY KEY AUTOINCREMENT NOT NULL, 
    author_id INTEGER REFERENCES author (id), 
    title text default '' not null );

Simple stuff: we have 2 tables, one for authors, and one for books, that points to the author table.

=head3 Populate with some data

Ian M. Banks

Richard Matheson
Frank Herbert
Isaac Asimov
Clive Barker

=head2 Use DBIC

Instead of interacting with the database using SQL, let's configure
DBIX::Class. DBIC needs to understand how your data are organized in your
database. There are two ways of letting DBIC know:

=over

=item *

either by writing a set of Perl modules, called schema modules: they will describe the database schema, each module describing one entity,

=item *

or by letting DBIC connect to the database, explore it, and generate the schema itself.

=back

I'll demonstrate the use of the two solutions. I'm personally not a big fan of
the detection method: on complex database, it doesn't get everything right, so
one needs to help DBIC. I prefer describing the schema manually. But hey,
TIMTOWTDI.

=head3 Use auto-detection

Let's add some configuration in our Dancer application. We want to indicate
that we want to use the C<Dancer::Plugin::DBIC> plugin, and how we want to use
it. We also want to define a new DBIC schema, that we will call C<bookstore>.
And we need to indicate that this schema is connected to the SQLite database we
created.

  # add in bookstore/config.yml
  plugins:
    DBIC:
      bookstore:
        dsn:  "dbi:SQLite:dbname=bookstore.db"

You could potentially define more schemas, by adding more fields under the C<DBIC:> entry.

B<Note> : you've noticed that we have only described which database to link the
schema to. That way, we let C<Dancer::Plugin::DBIC> connect to the database and
discover its schema, and make it available for us

bookstore/environments/development.yml


 that will describe the


 There are two ways of using DBIC. FirstDBIC needs a schema



We also need a view:

  # 

Let's add a route:

  # add in bookstore/lib/bookstore.pm
  
But 

 way of writing the web application code



 It's
=head1 SEE ALSO

=head1 AUTHOR

dams: Damien Krotkine <dams@zarb.org>
