=head1 Another year of Dancing...

Welcome to the Dancer advent calendar!

We skipped last year's advent calendar, but we're hoping the articles we
gathered this year will help you learn more about Dancer and
specifically Dancer2, which is the target version of all new applications.

We will show changes Dancer2 has made, features it recently added, a few
tricks, and even survey the code - as well as mention some of our
numerous community contributors, and take a look at the project as a
whole.

=head2 More and more dancers...

Usage of Dancer continues to grow, with more new users added to the
L<dancefloor|http://dancer.pm/dancefloor>.

If you're using Dancer in your company and would like to appear on the
dancefloor page, please contact us.

Dancer has been spotted as a required/desired skill in several job adverts,
showing the increased uptake of Dancer in corporate web apps. Try
L<searching for Dancer on jobs.perl.org|http://jobs.perl.org/search?q=dancer>.

=head2 Dancer2 - a reality

Far more progress has been made with L<Dancer2>. It is now a fully usable,
robust replacement for Dancer 1. That said, Dancer 1 will continue to be
supported for some time yet and continues to receive bugfixes, support, and
minor improvements.

This article will focus mainly on Dancer2.

=head2 Dancer at LPW2013

Andrew Solomon ran a free two-hour Dancer 2 training course at last year's
London Perl  Workshop.  Andrew's course was a hands-on training session to 
develop a website with dynamic content using Dancer, during which the attendees
would:

=over

=item * Learn about Dancer2 as a framework and as a language

=item * Implement route handlers using sessions and hooks

=item * Implement views, templates, and layouts using Template Toolkit and Bootstrap

=item * Understand the concept of Model-View-Controller

=item * Experience structuring code for maintainability

=item * Experience using object oriented Perl modules

=item * Understand all the crazy jargon above!

=back

See also Andrew's L<Perl Web Development|http://geekuni.com/perl-web-d2> course
on geekuni.com.

=head2 DancerConf

This year in Hancock, New York, the first Dancer conference was held. It
had trainings on L<Dancer> (and L<Dancer2>), L<DBIx::Class>, and other
related technologies.

We plan on having another conference in 2015 as well.

=head2 Dancer IRC channel community grows

The community of helpful users on the Dancer IRC channel continues to grow!
You can find us on C<irc.perl.org> in C<#dancer> or L<irc://irc.perl.org/dancer>
if your system is configured to support C<irc://> links.

If you do not regularly use IRC but wish to join us, there is also a web IRC
client available at L<http://dancer.pm/irc> for ease of use.

=head2 AUTHORS

David Precious (BIGPRESH)

Sawyer X (XSAWYERX)

