=head1 Outreach Program for Women (OPW) and Dancer

The L<Outreach Program for Women|https://opw.gnome.org> (OPW) helps
women work on Open Source and Free Software applications while
receiving a salary and having a mentor by their side.

L<The Perl Foundation|http://www.perlfoundation.org/> (TPF) is
L<participating|http://www.perlfoundation.org/outreach_program_for_women>
this year again, and this year we have the pleasure of participating
with Dancer!

=head2 Our participant

Our applicant, Snigdha Dagar, has been accepted to work on L<Dancer2>'s
documentation overhaul!

She had already contributed the first draft of the
L<Dancer2::Manual::Migration> document to help users with upgrading from
L<Dancer> to L<Dancer2>.

=head2 The documentation overhaul

The documentation overhaul was deemed a crucial component in making the
upgrading from Dancer 1 to Dancer 2 more attainable.

The current documentation has been copied over from Dancer 1, but is not
completely compatible. Some things have changed and many features have
been added. Unfortunately in the frenzy of continuing upgrading Dancer
and its abilities, along with important improvements, we lack the tuits
to resolve the outstanding problems with the current documentation.

Starting from scratch would be a tremendous amount of work, and whether
it will be less or more work than going through the current documentation
with a fine comb and sorting it out still does not resolve the problem
with the lack of personnel for this task.

What we need is human resources - and not the department. :)

=head2 There is a plan

Snigdha has provided a plan for overhauling the documentation, which
includes researching other FOSS projects, provide introductory material,
How-to guides, and cohesiveness of the overall documentation.

Her work will help resolve the documentation problems, assure consistency,
accuracy, and above all, a well structured, helpful documentation for such
an important project.

=head2 There will be updates

We are excited and delighted to have her help in these upcoming months
and we will be providing updates on the progress made.

We are certain Snigdha would appreciate any guidance and assistance from
the community. Feel free to suggest corrections, improvements, what to
focus on, what to not focus on, and how to assure the success of her work
and the project.

=head2 Author

This article has been written by Sawyer X for the Perl
Dancer Advent Calendar 2014.

=head2 Copyright

No copyright retained. Enjoy.

2014 // Sawyer X C<< <xsawyerx@cpan.org> >>
