=head1 Dancer2 - starting anew

It has a different namespace, a different release manager, and a different
repo - L<Dancer2> sounds like a completely new thing, which it is. But it
also isn't.

=head2 The portsmith's history

Dancer started as a Perl port of Sinatra - a successful light web framework
in Ruby. The author of Dancer, Alexis Sukrieh (AKA, sukria), who is also
a Ruby programmer, had enjoyed it so much, he wanted something similar in
Perl. He then began the task of porting Sinatra to Perl under the name
B<Dancer>.

L<Dancer> had become very successful. In fact it had been so successful a
wonderful warm community grew around it. Users and developers alike sharing
their use cases, giving talks, trainings, writing articles, and even
making it part of their job.

When Dancer became a production framework in various companies, a major
flaw in the design had creeped into sight: the global state. (Chime in
with horror music.)

Many components in Dancer were globals and this shared state made it
impossible to have multiple applications without side-effects. Sukria had
gone underground and returned with B<Dancer 2>. A completely rewritten
framework, based on the same principle as Dancer, sharing the same DSL
and overall design, but lacking the global state which had crippled
Dancer so.

This version promised to be the noble successor.

=head2 The version that never was

Unfortunately the code was still incompatible in some ways. Plugins, mainly,
did not work, since the architecture was vastly different. We wanted to
release both a I<2.0> branch and a I<1.0> branch, but CPAN does not allow
that. We then decided to split the namespace to allow both versions to
exist at the same time while we iron out the missing bits. Considering
B<Mongrel2> and even Perl's L<Amon2>,
why not B<Dancer2>?

After a few releases, Sukria had to attend to more pressing issues, and
Dancer2 received little attention. Sawyer, who had become the project
leader for production version of Dancer, took Dancer2, and
Yanick Champoux, the amazing French Canadian, had taken the production
version of Dancer under his wing - one of many wings, in fact.

=head2 The prodigal daughter

Following multiple big releases, Dancer2 had become ready for mass usage.
It has a few rough edges, but in most ways, it's in fact much more reliable.

Dancer2 has the following advantages over Dancer 1, amongst others:

=over 4

=item * Composable Dancer Applications

Dancer2 Apps are composable units that take care of their own dispatching.
While we have the original C<dance> behavior to dispatch over all registered
applications, we now have much better mechanisms to handle separate
applications without forcing the user to have all or nothing.

This Advent Calendar will feature an article showcasing this functionality
with plenty of explanations on the matter.

=item * Decoupled DSL implementation

The DSL implementation in Dancer2 is decoupled in a way that allows us to
improve it without changing it for the users. In fact, Dancer2 shares the
majority of the DSL with Dancer 1 and we can keep that working as expected.

=item * Successful object system

Instead of rolling our own objects, Dancer2 uses L<Moo>, which provides the
same behavior as L<Moose> for all the objects we have. It allows us to have
much smarter objects than we did before with lazy attributes, attribute
builders, role composition, and more.

=item * Better development server

Dancer2 uses the L<Plack> core development server, L<HTTP::Server::PSGI>,
which provides a more reliable experience. In the past, for Dancer 1, we
had to work around a lot of problems with the development server.

=item * Less specialized code

Dancer 1 contained a lot of unnecessary code which was removed in favor of
a proper implementation around Plack: this includes the command line
parsing when importing the DSL, static file serving, testing code, and more.

=item * Robust CLI capabilities

The command-line interface in Dancer2 is written in L<App::Cmd>, which
allows us to extend it fully, providing interesting command-line features.

We haven't yet gone nuts with it, but now we'll be able to do so, and we
have a few interesting ideas.

=item * Devoted set of developers

While Dancer version 1 has been placed into freeze mode, Dancer2 has a
group of developers devoted to it. More and more developers have joined the
core team as well. This includes the aforementioned Yanick, Russell Jenkins,
Mickey Nasriachi, Stefan Hornburg (Racke), Steven Humphrey, Alberto Simões,
and David Precious. Somewhere in there Sawyer X is probably there, but we
can't attest to that - at least not legally.

=back

At the end of the day, though, there is one major consideration we've yet
to mention.

=head2 The version that is

While many users are still on Dancer 1, Dancer2 is ready and waiting, and
we're pooling all of our efforts to improving it. Dancer 1 is on freeze
mode, meaning no new features.

Dancer2 is B<NOT> a new framework, it is simply the next version. When
asked in the past, we explained that this isn't Perl 5 and Perl 6.

Dancer2 might have a few rough edges, but it's much more reliable,
correct, featureful, and a much safer bet than Dancer 1.

=head2 Conclusion

Please consider writing your new code in L<Dancer2> and also porting any
major applications you want to continue to develop. If you find difficulties
in the process, please let us know, so we could fix them.

Be careful though, that's the first step to becoming a contributor! :)

=head2 Author

This article has been written by Sawyer X for the Perl
Dancer Advent Calendar 2014.

=head2 Copyright

No copyright retained. Enjoy.

2014 // Sawyer X C<< <xsawyerx@cpan.org> >>

