=head1 The Dancer community policy

In October 2014 we have introduced our Dancer core and community policy
and our Standards of Conduct. You can find them at L<Dancer::Policy>
or L<Dancer2::Policy> (identical documents).

While the Dancer community has always pride itself of the warm feeling
members have received, helpfulness and kindness were abundant, we still
found it necessary to introduce a policy document.

=head2 Why do we need it?

While the policy is not an answer to a situation in the Dancer community,
it is to behavior we've seen in other communities in and out of the tech
industry.

There are people who are not only discriminated against, but also
marginalized daily. There are people who feel pushed out of the way, made
small and insignificant, and dis-empowered by others who tend to have a
more favorable starting point - what is usually referred to as
"privileged".

We felt it is absolutely crucial to provide a document that makes it
absolutely clear, without a shadow of a doubt, that the Dancer community
is maintained and owned by its members - all having a fair and equal
stance in it. It is essential that everyone in the community feel and
understand this space belongs to them just as much as it does to anyone
else.

=head2 Introducing a problem where none exists?

So, are we really just fixing a situation that is not broken? If all is
fine and well in the Dancer community, why provide such standards of
conduct? That's a good question.

Standards of conduct have multiple purposes:

=over 4

=item * Set expectations of behavior

It is important that people in the community are aware of both what is
expected from them (such as "you are expected to not be abusive towards
anyone") and what they can expect from others (such as "you can expect
not to be abused by anyone"). Setting these expectations allows people to
let their guard down, enjoy their time, approach others, and be an active
member without fearing abuse.

The community, above all, should be a B<safe space> for all of its members.

=item * Provide a stern warning

The document clearly explains that not only do we have expectations, but
we will take measures against those who violate them. This helps defend the
expectations we described above.

If you will violate those standards, we will make sure you are held
accountable. This makes sure these are not empty promises and that they won't
be perceived as such.

=item * Enforcement transparency

While we provide these standards and a promise to enforce them, it is also
important to provide transparency. You need to know I<what> will be done
and I<how> decisions will be made.

=back

=head2 Can I still be me?

Many people worry that with a standards of conduct policy they will not be
able to be themselves anymore. This is worth addressing.

The standards of conduct clearly stipulate you may not, under any
circumstance, be abusive to others. If violating that robs you of your
being, it means you are an abusive person - a person we hope other
community members will not have to experience or deal with.

This, however, is not the same as "I will need to watch what I say".
Having to make an effort to be kinder, more composed, or in general more
respectful, is an understood effort. It is an effort we make every day. We
make sure we're more respectful towards our friends, colleagues, peers,
and we make sure we curse much less around our parents.

While it is not always a simple task to work on our behavior, it is far
different than violating your core principles.

In short, if your core principles are to hurt others, and you feel like
our standards of conduct negate that, we've done a good job.

=head2 Conclusion

The community is maintained by the community members. Each and every single
member should be regarded with respect, and we should all feel a sense of
belonging to and in our community.

The Dancer standards of conduct have been introduced to make sure new members
understand this and know what we each expect from each other.

We were thrilled with getting such positive results from a community. Members
have unequivocally said we are happy to make this message clear to all current
and future members.

=head2 Thanks

Praise should be given to C<#p5p> (The Perl 5 Porters list) which provided the
base for the policy document, to L<@sungo|http://twitter.com/sungo> for pushing
to make community standards published clearly and for doing so with the Perl
IRC servers, and to L<ribasushi|https://metacpan.org/author/RIBASUSHI> for
helping revise and suggest improvements to the policy as it was being written.

The biggest thanks is, as always, to the wonderful and loving Dancer community
and all of its members. :)

=head2 Author

This article has been written by Sawyer X for the Perl
Dancer Advent Calendar 2014.

=head2 Copyright

No copyright retained. Enjoy.

2014 // Sawyer X C<< <xsawyerx@cpan.org> >>

