=head1 Sweetening the test suite

The testing suite of a project is an important component, allowing users and
developers to maintain trust in the code. Having an organized testing suite
makes it easier for developers to add new tests, improve existing tests, and
make sure tests are evenly covering the variety of code from all of its
angles, as well as making it easier for contributors to help out.

=head2 The sweet suite

While mayhem ruled the testing suite of Dancer (both version 1 and 2), we've
recently started rearranging it in order to handle the various situations our
code works under.

Here's the new structure:

=head3 t/classes/

The main component of the testing suite are the classes. In L<Dancer2> all the
DSL implementation is built on top of core classes. This allows us to
decouple the keywords the user uses and their implementation.

Under the F<t/classes/> we run tests for classes only. This should not run web
requests, understand the web environment, or anything of the sort. Some
exceptions may apply, but we try to minimize those.

Each class has a directory for itself, allowing you to quick find it, and add
tests to it. Each method gets its own test file. We test roles as well, of
course. In each directory we can provide static files fo test various
scenarios.

=head3 t/dsl/

The user-visible interface of the Dancer web framework is the DSL, which are
those keywords we use to define routing.

The DSL is tested under the F<t/dsl/> directory. Inside it each DSL keyword
has its own file. Keywords requiring more than a single test, or requiring
static files (such as sample configuration files), receive their own
directory.

We're still porting the old DSL keywords into clean tests inside the
F<t/dsl/> directory, which means this directory is still relatively small
and most of the DSL tests are strewn across the general F<t/> directory.

We wouldn't say no to any help offered. :)

=head3 t/issues/

Regression tests offer a test which isn't covered by the above described
categories. We use regression tests to check specific situations, rather than
code paths.

Since these situations arise in tickets (and tickets can always be opened
for them if not), we created a directory holding all of these tests, sorted
by the tracker and the ticket ID in that tracker.

Often times a good way to handle an issue is to provide a test, which
can then allow verifying it was fixed.

For example, we have F<t/issues/gh-723.t> to make sure that scenario doesn't
pop up again as a bug.

=head2 Conclusion

Nowadays when we want to play with tests, we already know where they go and
how to write them. Now you do too, which makes it possible for you to write up
some tests when providing a fix or a feature, or when you just want to improve
the testing coverage.

Consistency in the test suite is absolutely vital in order to
continually improve the testing coverage and make sense of the testing code.

=head2 Author

This article has been written by Sawyer X for the Perl
Dancer Advent Calendar 2014.

=head2 Copyright

No copyright retained. Enjoy.

2014 // Sawyer X C<< <xsawyerx@cpan.org> >>

