=head1 What's next for Dancer? (looking into the future)

It's been a busy year, and we got a lot to be happy about. But there is always more work to
be done, and always more improvements to be made.

This list is by no means exhaustive, but it should give you a little glimpse for some of the 
things we have in store for 2019:

=over 4

=item * New Documentation

You asked for it, and I made reference to it on day 1, all new documentation is coming in
2019. While many of you love the docs, a lot of you don't, and thanks to your comments in last
year's survey, we think we have a good understanding of why. 

The new documentation branch is well underway, and addresses the shortcomings of the existing 
documentation by explaining important concepts in a clear and simple way. You'll have a better
understanding of how and why Dancer2 does the things it does.

New users will get some grounding in web development techniques, too. There's a lot of great
changes for everyone!

=item * New Website

There's a lot of great information on the Dancer website, but it's looking tired. There's a 
lot of new information to be added, and with a fresh coat of paint, Dancer's website will be as
great as the software powering it.

=item * More configuration options

Configuration in Dancer2 leaves a lot to be desired (and I'll admit that I am a big part of 
the reason for why that is). Look for an overhaul of the configuration system in 2019, which
starts with a barebones configuration system and allows for pluggable configuration engines
(much like loggers and sessions in Dancer2). Since we are dedicated to not breaking working 
code, all of the existing configuration logic would be packaged as a plugin and enabled
out of the box.

=item * Inline parameter type checking

Very similar in many ways to Sawyer's L<Dancer2::Plugin::ParamTypes|https://metacpan.org/pod/Dancer2::Plugin::ParamTypes>
plugin, but provided as core functionality. SysPete is actively developing a way to provide
(optional) type checking of parameters within the core of Dancer2.

In case you haven't read L<Sawyer's article|http://advent.perldancer.org/2018/22> 
about type checking parameters passed to your Dancer applications, I highly recommend 
it. It will change the way you do data validation.

=item * Continued support for Dancer (1)

While most all of our effort is spent on Dancer2 these days, there are no plans to sunset
Dancer (1) as of now. Many of the core developers are still actively maintaining applications
written in Dancer, as is much of our community. 

It is still our hope, however, that with an easy migration path from Dancer to Dancer2 that more
of you will make the switch in 2019.

=back

=head2 Happy Holidays!

We hope all of you have a safe and happy holiday season, and we look forward to a great 2019! 
Until then, keep on Dancing!

=head2 Author

This article has been written by Jason Crome (CromeDome) for the Perl Dancer 
Advent Calendar 2018.

=head2 Copyright

No copyright retained. Enjoy.

Jason A. Crome

