=head1 Another year of Dancing...

Welcome to the Dancer advent calendar, for the fourth year running!  Previous
year's calendars have been well received, let's hope this one can live up to
them (and see the request for help towards the end if you want to help make sure
it does!)



=head2 More and more dancers...

Usage of Dance continues to grow, with more new users added to the
L<dancefloor|http://dancer.pm/dancefloor> page including 
L<POSANDRO|http://politicalweb.org.uk/>,
L<Used Cars Group|http://www.usedcarsgroup.com/>,
L<The Political Web|http://politicalweb.org.uk/>,
L<Hannover Perl Mongers|http://hannover.pm/> and others.

(Using Dancer but not listed on the dancefloor page?  Feel free to contact us to
be featured!)

Dancer has been spotted as a required/desired skill in several job adverts,
showing the increased uptake of Dancer in corporate web apps - for instance, a
L<search for Dancer on jobs.perl.org|http://jobs.perl.org/search?q=dancer>
returns 21 jobs at the time of writing.



=head2 Dancer2 - a reality

Far more progress has been made with Dancer 2, with it now being a fully usable,
robust replacement for Dancer 1.  That said, Dancer 1 will continue to be
supported for some time yet and continues to receive bugfixes, support and minor
improvements..




=head2 Dancer at LPW2013

Andrew Solomon ran a free two-hour Dancer 2 training course at this year's 
London Perl  Workshop.  Andrew's course was a hands-on training session to 
develop a website with dynamic content using Dancer, during which the attendees
would:

=over

=item * Learn about Dancer2 as a framework and as a language

=item * Implement route handlers using sessions and hooks

=item * Implement views, templates and layouts using Template Toolkit and Bootstrap

=item * Understand the concept of Model-View-Controller

=item * Experience structuring code for maintainability

=item * Experience using object oriented Perl modules

=item * Understand all the crazy jargon above!

=back

See also Andrew's L<Perl Web Development|http://geekuni.com/perl-web-d2> course
on geekuni.com.


=head2 Dancer IRC channel community grows

The community of helpful users on the Dancer IRC channel continues to grow!  You
can find us on C<irc.perl.org> in C<#dancer> - or L<irc://irc.perl.org/dancer>
if your system is configured to support C<irc://> links.

If you do not regularly use IRC but wish to join us, there is also a web IRC
client available at L<http://dancer.pm/irc> for ease of use.

At the time of writing, there are 115 people present in C<#dancer>!


=head2 Request for help

David Precious (bigpresh) traditionally manages our advent calendar efforts and
pulls together most of the content, but is very pushed for time now, with his
son Scott being born 10 weeks ago - littlepresh takes priority :)  So, if you
are willing to volunteer to write a post or two, assistance would be very much
appreciated.  If you are a Dancer user (especially in a commercial environment)
and would be willing to take part in a mini interview by email, that would be
very useful too (and provides a small feature on your company as a bonus).  If
you're interested in helping out, please email davidp@preshweb.co.uk.


=head2 Conclusion

Well, this was a hastily-put-together look back at 2013; the following days will
have various articles regarding Dancer which I hope will be of interest.  Not
all days are filled yet, so if you wish to write a post for the advent calendar,
please contact me - all assistance would be greatly appreciated!



=head2 AUTHOR

David Precious (BIGPRESH)



