=head1 Meet the core team

Dancer has evolved quickly from a prototype based on the idea of porting Ruby's
L<Sinatra|http://sinatrarb.com/> to a fully featured and popular micro-framework. 
This has been possible thanks to a vast community of users who contributed ideas,
bug reports and patches.

Time after time, some of these users appeared to be very motivated and
productive and it's quite natural that a I<Core Team> emerged.

In this article we'll present each member of the team, so you can put some
faces behind the Git history and IRC users.

The core team is probably the best feature of Dancer, so please, let me
introduce you to the men who make Perl dance!

=head2 Sawyer X (sawyer)

581 commits so far, first one on Jan 13th, 2010 (L<b7cc27b|https://github.com/sukria/Dancer/commit/b7cc27b>)

Sawyer X has been using Perl for almost 10 years now.  We works as a Perl
developer and systems administrator.  He is responsible for Organising 
L<TelAviv.pm|http://telaviv.pm.org> meetings.  Sawyer picked up Dancer after 
checking out several small web frameworks on CPAN. The
responsiveness and kindness in the community prompted him to suggest and develop
his first contribution to Dancer - a route caching system. Since then he has
become a core developer, project mentor and lecturer world-wide.

He is currently the maintainer and release manager of the 1.x branch.

=head2 David Precious (bigpresh)

284 commits so far, first one on Feb 11th, 2010 (L<b92d612|https://github.com/sukria/Dancer/commit/b92d612>)

David Precious (bigpresh) is a professional Perl developer from London,
with 11 years of commercial experience working in the ISP and hosting
market.

He discovered Dancer in February 2010 whilst looking for a framework
which was nice to use and didn't feel awkward, contributed a few
improvements and fixes, and eventually ended up with a commit bit.

Since then he's promoted the project in the Perl community, maintains the
website and advent calendar, and helps improve the documentation as well as
fixing bugs and adding features.

When not in front of a keyboard, he is a keen motorcyclist, plays
squash, and enjoys drinking beer.  Quite a lot of beer.


=head2 Alberto Simões (ambs)

426 commits so far, first commit on Dec 19th, 2010 (L<537c5aa|https://github.com/sukria/Dancer/commit/537c5aa>).

Alberto started using Perl in 1999. He uses Perl mostly for natural language
processing. He was a old school CGI programmer until he heard about Dancer in 
2010's Dancer Advent Calendar. Since then he started using and patching Dancer 
and annoying Dancer core developers. He poked so much that he was promoted to 
a Dancer core developer.

Alberto was also the organizer of
L<YAPC::EU::2005|http://conferences.yapceurope.org/ye2005/> in Braga, Portugal 
and L<YAPC::EU::2009|http://conferences.yapceurope.org/ye2009/> in Lisbon, 
Portugal. He is the co-founder of the 
Portuguese Perl Users Group, and secretary of 
L<The Perl Foundation|www.perlfoundation.org/> (TPF) grants committee.

=head2 Damien Krotkine (dams)
 
172 commits so far, first commit on Sep 26th, 2010 (L<16ad3a9|https://github.com/sukria/Dancer/commit/16ad3a9>)

Damien has been using Perl since 1999. He started using Dancer in late 2010 for 
a small project, done in 2 days. Amazed by the ease of use, he started 
contributing, and got the commit bit soon after. He has worked at Mandrakesoft, 
Mandriva, IDM, Venda, and now Weborama. He organises the tech meeting of the 
L<Paris Perl Mongers|http://paris.pm.org/> since September 2011.

When not coding Perl, he enjoys life with his lovely wife,
mainly doing rock climbing.

=head2 Franck Cuny (franck)

First commit Jan 14th, 2010 (L<dff82bf|https://github.com/sukria/Dancer/commit/dff82bf>)

=head2 Alexis Sukrieh (sukria)

1442 commits so far, first commit on Jul 17th 2009 (L<da6c198|https://github.com/sukria/Dancer/commit/da6c198>)

Alexis has been working in the Internet industry for more than ten years. 
He's always been passionated about computer programming and
free software. Perl has always been the language Alexis enjoys the most, and
luckily he always managed to find a paid-job with Perl throughout his carreer.

Before creating Dancer, Alexis used to be a Debian developer and wrote a
popular backup tool called L<Backup Manager|http://www.backup-manager.org>.

In summer 2009 he started experimenting a port of the Ruby project L<Sinatra|http://sinatrarb.com> in
Perl, that's how Perl Dancer was born. Alexis tried hard to build a friendly
and responsive community around Dancer, he's very happy to see the project
evolving by itself.
Alexis now dedicates all his free time on L<Dancer 2|http://advent.perldancer.org/2011/8>, 
a complete rewrite of the project.

Alexis works at L<Weborama|http://www.weborama.com>, 
a company that works in the Internet advertisement industry.

=head2 Authors

This article has been written by the core team for the Dancer Advent Calendar
2011.
