=head1 Thanking the contributors

Dancer's success and growth so far would not have been possible without
contributions from a growing community of helpful contributors.

GitHub reports a current total of 70 individual contributors, but this of course
does not count people who reported bugs / requested features / offered feedback.

This article has been written to offer thanks to the developers who have
contributed directly through GitHub, a brief summary of which is below, and to
everyone who has contributed in any way, whether through helping out in the
Dancer IRC channel, answering questions on the mailing list, presenting Dancer
at various Perl events, generally promoting Dancer, and of course using Dancer
to build fun stuff! :)

So, a big thank you to everyone, and best wishes from the Dancer team for a very
merry Christmas and a happy and prosperous New Year!

=head2 2010's contributors according to GitHub

In no particular order, thanks go to:

=over


=item Alexis Sukrieh

=over

=item * Cleanup session tests folder 

=item * Cleanup on Dancer::FileUtils

=item * Documenting the plack_middlewares_map

=back


=item Sawyer X

=over

=item * GH #391: Dancer::Logger::Note now exists.

=item * Porting documentation on WRAPPER to Dancer::Template::TemplateToolkit.

=item * GH #297: All logging options can automatically serialize references.

=item * GH#303: Generated Makefile.PL's clean is done correctly now.

=back




=item Alberto Simões

=over

=item * Detected errors in scaffolded dispatchers

=item * Support XML::Simple configuration for serializing/deserializing

=item * Remove hard-coded version from 404.html and 500.html

=item * Fix a bunch of cpan testers reports 

=back




=item David Precious

=over

=item * Make template work outside of requests (Issue 592)

=item * Major rewrite/reorganization on Dancer::Config documentation

=item * Added Dancer::Cookbook to provide lots of concrete examples for
newcomers.

=item * Added session backend Dancer::Session::Simple

=back



=item Damien Krotkine

=over

=item * Created continuations-style exception system!

=item * Implement session directory testing cache for Session::YAML

=item * Improve Serializers documentation

=back


=item Michael G. Schwern

=over

=item * Improve Dancer::Test so failures report the correct line numbers.

=item * Tested that Dancer::Session::Cookie isn't broken

=item * Fixed the plack_middlewares example in the cookbook

=back


=item Philippe Bruhat (BooK)

=over

=item * Added script/wallflower, helper to turn a Dancer application into a static
web site.

=item * better behaviour for plugin_setting (better search, more user-friendly)

=back


=item Naveed Massjouni

=over

=item * default layout uses <% request.base %> in order to support mounted apps

=item * FIX for issues #111 and #108

=back

=item Maurice

=over

=item * Provided documentation for Dancing on command line.

=item * Improve Dancer::Cookbook.


=back


=item Roman Galeev

=over

=item * YAML Session UTF-8 Fix

=item * Introduce new timestamp format in logger (%T)

=back


=item Stefan Hornburg (Racke)

=over

=item * POD fix.

=back


=item Yanick Champoux

=over

=item * Changed Dancer::Test tests to assume 'GET' if their first argument is scalar.

=item * Recognize absolute redirects

=item * Fix before_serializer POD fix 

=back



=item Anirvan Chatterjee

=over

=item * Provided various documentation typo fixes

=back


=item James Aitken

=over

=item * Fixed issues GH #84 #86 and #87

=back


=item Rowan Thorpe

=over

=item * Fixed anti UNC substitution under Cygwin

=item * GH#220: fix for path issues under MacOS X and Windows platforms.

=item * Better detection of the application layout under non-UNIX platforms.

=item * Set binmode in write_data_to_file() to fix image corruption in
      Windows
      
=back


=item Geistteufel

=over

=item * Fixed cookies disappearing when more than one is set.
      Complete refactoring of the cookie handling.

=item * Documented a complete working example of deployment under Nginx/Starman in
      Deployment.pod

=back


=item Paul Driver

=over

=item * Provided support for virtual location.

=back


=item Gabor Szabo

=over

=item * Eliminated test warnings on Windows.

=item * Adding test for multi-leveled scaffolding.

=back


=item Alex Kalderimis

=over

=item * Documentation and tests on how to use many Dancer application
      inside one PSGI file (PR 564)

=item * Documentation and tests on how to use many Dancer application
      inside one PSGI file (PR 564)

=back


=item felixdo

=over

=item * Fixed a bug that made system() fail with -1 under Dancer

=back


=item chromatic

=over

=item * Cleaned up PSGI handler code 

=item * Improved warning localizations

=back


=item minty

=over

=item * Bump HTTP::Body dependency to 1.07

=item * Updated Introduction pod with a dancer opt

=back


=item Squeeks

=over

=item * The ability for dancer_response to send file contents for file uploads
      as a scalar, instead of reading from file on disk

=item * Providing a report about Query string params

=back


=item Mark Stosberg

=over

=item * Provided a report on CRLF injection in response headers

=item * Provided a report on multi-valued params in GET/POST data

=back


=item Nate Jones

=over

=item * More HTTP codes supported for a better REST compat

=item * Thing 2

=back


=item niko

=over

=item * Cookie accessor to manipulate cookies directly.

=back


=item Pedro Melo

=over

=item * Tweak tests regular expression to be more flexible

=item * Fix hooks implementation that failed when user messes $_

=back


=item Ask Bjørn Hansen

=over

=item * In development, pretty-print JSON serializations for easier development 

=back


=item Sebastian de Castelberg

=over

=item * Allowed the dancer helper to download files via a transparent proxy

=item * Support for path_info() in Dancer::Request so it's possible to
mount an application under a directory.

=item * Fixed priority in D::S::Mutable.

=back


=item Alessandro Ranellucci

=over

=item * Fix prefix behavior with load_app

=back


=item Emmanuel Rodriguez

=over

=item Support for 'content_type' option on send_file when sending a
      system wide file

=back


=item Adam J. Foxson

=over

=item * FIX for issue GH#136:
"readline() on closed filehandle DATA" error that appears when running
the app with Starman


=item * Addresses issue #136: "readline() on closed filehandle DATA"

=back


=item Mark Allen

=over

=item * Added a tutorial (Dancer::Tutorial)

=item * Provided an example application 'Dancr', provided in example/

=back


=item Joshua Barratt

=over

=item * Dancer::Serializer::JSON supports 'allow_blessed' and 'convert_blessed'
options.

=back


=item Ivan Paponov

=over

=item * Support HTTP_X_FORWARDED_HOST in behing proxy



=back



=item Juan J. Martínez

=over

=item * Provided a report about a bug which returned a voice context after redirecting a route.

=back


=item Hagen Fuchs

=over

=item * Request.pm Decode HTTP::Request's uploads

=back



=item François Charlier

=over

=item * Provided a fix for GH#76 and GH#88

=back



=item JT Smith

=over

=item * Error Hook (PR 563)

=back


=item Olof Johansson

=over

=item * Fixed Dancer::Plugins typos in the documentation


=back


=item Al Newkirk

=over

=item * fixed redirect to redirect immediately


=back



=item Ivan Bessarabov

=over

=item * Worked on fixing TT example config.


=back


=item Sam Kington

=over

=item * Deserialize PATCH requests

=back



=item Dave Doyle

=over

=item * Working on clarifying Pod as to how before_template works

=back


=item Flavio Poletti

=over

=item * Added "git fetch upstream" for remote tracking

=item * Turned a tab into the right number of spaces

=back

=head1 AUTHOR

Kindly authored by Viktor C, a student partaking in the Google Code-In, mentored
by David Precious - thanks Viktor for your contribution too!

=head1 MERRY CHRISTMAS!

That's it for this year's Dancer Advent Calendar - we hope it's been an
enjoyable read for you, and thank you for your interest in the project.  From
all of the core development team, we wish you a happy Christmas (or happy
holidays, if you don't observe Christmas) and a happy and prosperous New Year!

We're all off to raise a glass of our favourite tipple to the success of the
project, and warmly invite you to join us :)

=cut
